The Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra 
Chapter 1 {1} 
Oṁ, homage to Mañjughoṣa! 
The teacher of living beings, Mañjuvajra, Taught this tantra for the sake of the world— The tantra of Siddhaikavīra, the heroic lord, The best and foremost among speakers. 
This very deity, in the form of the mantra, Bounteously grants every accomplishment. 
On him indeed should the follower of Mantra meditate. 
He in whom Siddhaikavīra is realized will gain accomplishment. 
A follower of Mantra who has a pure body, Once the small accomplishment has been obtained, Will make his body a field In which the great accomplishment will arise And gradually to him will come The attainment of bhūmis and so forth. 
Like a wish-fulfilling gem, this follower of Mantra Will always act for the benefit of beings. 
With that in mind, overcome with compassion, When asked by Vajradhara and others, Mañjuvajra gave, for the sake of the world, A mantra collection of the accomplished ones. 
First mantra oṁ kālumelu kālumelu stambhaya śilāvarṣaṃ tuṣāravarṣaṃ ca lucca i lucca i svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, kālumelu kālumelu, stop the hailstorm and snowfall, stop, stop! 
Svāhā!Tib.: oṁ kālumelu kālume stambhaya śilāvarṣaṃ tuṣāranya ca lucca i lucca i svāhā&#160;| This king of mantras, when correctly recited, will stop a hailstorm. 
Merely to remember it, using incanted ashes, can stop snowTib.: “a hailstorm or a snowfall.” 
falling, or make it fall wherever one wishes. 
In the same way, one can also stop lightning, hurricanes, thunderbolt strikes, etc. 
{2} Second Mantra oṁ garuḍa haṃsa he he cala cala svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, garuḍa! 
Swan! 
Hey, hey! 
Move, move! 
Svāhā! 
The mere thought of this king of mantras will stop a hailstorm. 
By inscribing it on a kettle drum with chalk and chanting over the drumstick, one can then use the sound of the drum to stop a hailstorm. 
The same can be done with the sound of a conch, etc. 
Third Mantra oṁ he he tiṣṭha tiṣṭha bandha bandha dhāraya dhāraya nirundhaya nirundhaya devadattam ūrṇāmaṇe svāhā | Oṁ, hey, hey! 
Remain, remain! 
Bind, bind! 
Hold, hold! 
Restrain such-and-such, restrain! 
O Ūrṇāmaṇi, svāhā!In the Tibetan the mantra ends: nirundha nirundha chegemo* ūrṇāmaṇe svāhā. 
One should write the name of the enemy, in combination with this mantra, on a palm leaf, and place it in the burrow of a crab. 
That will bind the enemy’s mouth. 
It will also stop others’ evil designs, etc.Tib. 
omits the three sentences starting with “One should write…” 
and ending with “evil designs, etc.” 
This king of mantras, when recited 100,000 times according to the procedure of the preliminary practice,“Preliminary practice” 
(pūrvasevā) is a six-month period of formal practice to be performed before one can start employing the mantra for specific purposes. 
will bring success. 
By merely remembering this mantra one will be able to stop lightning, wind, thunderbolt strikes, hail, snow, and so forth. 
One will also stop torrential rain.In the Tibetan, the sentence “One will also stop torrential rain” 
appears in the next paragraph. 
By using incanted ashes and mustard seeds, one will bind the snouts of mice, the stylets of mosquitoes, etc. 
This will also stop attacks on a garden or field by birds, worms, locusts, and other pests. 
One should inscribe this mantra on a rag that has been discarded in a charnel ground, together with the name of a pregnant woman, enclose it in beeswax, place it in a charnel ground in a pot, seal it, and bury it. 
That will stop the woman from losing her fetus. 
Digging it up again, rinsing it with milk,Tib.: “with water and milk.” 
and floating it on water will bring alleviation of discomfort. 
One should write this mantra on birchbark or clothTib.: “on birchbark, cloth, or leaves.” 
with turmeric or yellow orpiment. 
One should make an effigyTib.: “an effigy in the form of Bhairava.” 
using clay from an anthill, and place the mantra, enclosed in beeswax, in the effigy’s heart. 
One should fill its mouth with ash and bury it.Skt.: “bury it right there.” 
In case of a dispute, one will be able to paralyze the mouth of one’s opponent. 
Also, in case of a lawsuit, one should incant the tongue of the effigy seven times and pierce it with seven thorns.Tib.: “one should incant seven thorns and stick them in the tongue of the effigy.” 
That will bind the opponent’s mouth. 
One should write this mantra on a clay pot with chalk, fill the pot with ashes, seal it, and bury it—that will paralyze the mouths of slanderers. 
With clay wiped off the hand of a potter, one should make an effigy of a ram, and place in its heart this mantra inscribed on birchbark with turmeric or yellow orpiment, tied up with a yellow string, and enclosed in beeswax.Except for the beeswax, the Tibetan omits the details of how the mantra should be written and wrapped. 
That will put an end to their anger and paralyze their mouths.Tib.: “That will paralyze the mouths of any aggressors.” 
When this mantra is written with saffronTib. 
omits “written with saffron.” 
and worn on one’s neck or arm, one will be able to stop the enemy’s weapons in battle. 
This king of mantras, placed at the feet of an effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill and buried at a crossroads, {3} will stop all coming and going. 
It will interrupt all daily activities. 
When this king of mantras, written on birchbark or cloth and enclosed in beeswax, is put in the Gaṇapati’s abdomen and placed in a new jar filled with coolTib. 
omits “cool.” 
water, it will stop all daily activities. 
While traveling, one will stop thieves and the like by tying a knot on the border of one’s upper garment and recalling the mantra. 
In a forest, one will stop animals with horns,Tib.: “animals with horns, such as the gaur.” 
or those with fangs. 
By throwing a lump of clay, incanted with this mantra seven times, into water, one will bind the teeth of water animals. 
One should write this mantra on a rag from a charnel ground, in combination with the names of the commanders of an opposing army, in the center of a double vajra. 
Outside the double vajra, one should write eight laṁ syllables, and around the outside of these, one should draw a doubleTib. 
omits “double.” 
maṇḍala of Indra. 
The mantra should then be placed in the abdomen of a Gaṇapati made of beeswax who is adorned with the double vajra.Translation based on the Tibetan. 
The Sanskrit reads, “The mantra should then be adorned with the double vajra and placed in the abdomen of a Gaṇapati made of beeswax.” 
When it is buried next to an opposing army, it will stop that army. 
One should place this mantra, enclosed at both ends by a syllable oṁ flanked by two ṭha syllables, adorned by eight laṁ syllables, covered with a maṇḍala of Indra, and embellished with a double vajra, in the abdomen of the effigy of Gaṇapati made of clay from an anthill. 
One should then place it in a cremation urn and bury this urn in a cemetery.Tib. 
adds “or burn it in a homa of chaff.” 
That will stop an opposing army. 
If a city is on fire, one should offer a chaff homa and, facing the fire, throw on seven double handfuls of water, having first incanted it with the mantra. 
One will then be able to protect any house one wishes. 
By tying ashes to one’s neck, one will put an end to vomiting. 
One should pronounce the mantra while firmly pressing the tip of one’s little finger; that will stop hiccups. 
With incanted ash one can cure blindness.Translation based on the Tibetan. 
The Sanskrit reads, “one will arrest vision,” 
possibly meaning, “one will stabilize vision.” 
When afflicted with blistering leprosy, one should draw a cirikā A kind of weapon (Monier-Williams). 
on a piece of cloth.Skt. 
omits “on a piece of cloth.” 
Placed at any doorstep, it will prevent diseases such as blistering leprosy in that house. 
Outside a village one should offer a great bali of fish, meat, alcohol, sour gruel, etc. 
In the center of the village, one should prepare a fire pit for the rite of pacifying, with five types of sacrificial wood and five types of grain smeared with ghee, and perform a homa offering. 
This will stop all death-causing demons and accidents. 
A village, etc., can be protected from being handed over to another owner by simply reciting the mantra. 
By reciting the mantra continuously, one will become unassailableTib. 
reflects the reading adṛśyo (“invisible”). 
by gods, demi-gods, humans, and nāgas.Tib. 
omits “humans” 
and “nāgas,” 
but adds “mahoragas.” 
This king of mantras emerged from the ūrṇā hair between the eyebrows of the venerable lord Buddha at the time of his awakening in order to conquer the four māras. 
It is therefore called the jewel of the ūrṇā. 
To drive away snakes one should scatter gravel that has been incanted, or write the mantra on the wall of a house with incanted chalk. 
Alternatively, one should engrave the mantra with a chisel on a stone tablet and bury it. 
That will bind the teeth of wild animals and poisonous snakes in a house, village, or town for {4} as long as one desires. 
One breaks the spell by digging it up. 
This mantra accomplishes all endeavors even when it has not been fully mastered. 
To arrest the fangs of all creatures that bite, One should incant gravel, etc., and scatter it. 
All mantras should be written, together with the name of the intended person, in the center of the double vajra surrounded by a maṇḍala of Indra. 
By hiding eightTib. 
omits “eight.” 
splinters from a funeral pyre, incanted seven times, above an entrance door, one will interrupt the livelihood of all who live there. 
One can break the spell by taking the splinters out. 
Fourth Mantra oṁ nihi nicule abhayaṃkari elu velu śila pa ḍa i jahaṃ pelu āgāsapantharate ha attaṃdhari khili mo ḍi them bhi jakāre jā hi ṭhakāre hi ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ svāhā&#160;| Oṁ nihi, O Niculā who grants fearlessness! 
Elu velu śila pa ḍa i jahaṃ pelu āgāsapantharate ha attaṃdhari khili mo ḍi them bhi jakāre jā hi ṭhakāre hi ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ svāhā! 
This king of mantras accomplishes all the previously mentioned acts even if it is not fully mastered. 
Moreover, it will accomplish all other tasks that may be desired by the mantrin Tib. 
omits “by the mantrin.”. 
Making a homa offering of salt and black mustard, or a chaff homa will certainly put an opposing army to flight . 
Fifth Mantra oṁ ambāsimbāka pyāsu jom mo phe ḍa i du pyāsu | Oṁ, Ambāsimbāka, pyāsu jom mo phe ḍa i du pyāsu! 
This king of mantras will remove all fear in all those who constantly recite it, even before it is fully mastered. 
By making a tika on one’s foreheadTib. 
omits “by making a tika on one’s forehead.” 
with vajra water incanted seven times, one will confuse all of one’s adversaries and appease their anger. 
If one is imprisoned, constant recitation of it will set one free. 
When one meets with misfortune, one will be without fear. 
Sixth Mantra eṣotthito hulu hulu jvālājihve hulu hulu yatraivotthito hulu hulu tatraiva pratigacchatu hulu hulu svāhā&#160;| It has arisen; destroy it, destroy! 
Jvālājihvā, destroy it, destroy! 
Wherever it has arisen—destroy it, destroy—there you should go—destroy it, destroy! 
Svāhā! 
{5} This king of mantras brings peace to all those afflicted by the scourge of quarrels and disputes, even when recited just once.Tib. 
omits “just once.” 
Performing a chaff homa will pacify everything. 
By reciting this mantra over whatever flowers one may find and letting them float on water, one will surely pacify all and gain victory. 
If a city is on fire, one should stand facing the blaze, incant seven double-handfuls of water and throw them into the fire. 
Thus one will be able to protect any house one wishes by keeping it safe from the flames. 
By offering a chaff homa one will pacify epidemics among bipeds and quadrupeds.Tib. 
has instead, “one will pacify the teeth of bipeds and quadrupeds,” 
which makes little sense, as the teeth of bipeds seldom constitute a cause of fear. 
Seventh Mantra oṁ padme padmākṣi padmasubhage phura phura phura&#160;| Oṁ, O lotus-eyed Padmā! 
You with the beauty of a lotus! 
Flicker, flicker, flicker! 
HavingThe Sanskrit sentence begins with “this king of mantras,” 
which does not fit the context. 
incanted some ash with this mantra, one should apply it to the eyes, making a dressingTib. 
omits “making a dressing.” 
with it; by wiping the eyes, one will remove blindness. 
By gazing at an angry person with an eye incanted seven times, one will appease him. 
To have everybody’s adoration, one should rinse one’s face with water incanted seven times. 
By writing this mantra, interspersed with the beneficiary’s name, on a wall with chalk, one will cure all eye diseases. 
In a place where there are no people, one should one-pointedly incant one’s eyes seven times and stand with a one-pointedly focused mind. 
In the case of a man,Tib. 
omits “in the case of a man.” 
if the left eye throbs, it foretells the successful accomplishment of a task according to his wishes. 
If the right eye throbs, it announces something bad. 
Eighth Mantra oṁ mocani mocaya mokṣaṇi mokṣaya jīvaṃvarade svāhā | Oṁ, Mocanī, release! 
O Mokṣaṇī, set free! 
O Jīvaṃvaradā, svāhā! 
When a pregnant woman’s birth canal is anointed with incanted sesame oil, she will give birth with ease. 
Facing a bound person, one should throw seven double-handfuls of incanted water toward him in the three periods of the day. 
The bound person will then become free from his bondage. 
One should write this mantra with saffron or bovine orpiment on birchbark, and tie it to the head of someone who is bound; it will release him from bondage. 
Ninth Mantra oṁ harimarkaṭanāmasahasrabāhur devadattaṃ bandhanād mocaya svāhā | Oṁ, O thousand-armed one called Grey Monkey, please release such-and-such from bondage! 
Svāhā! 
Having incanted a piece of chalk, one should repeatedly write this mantra on the ground and rub it out in the opposite direction. 
Then a bound person will be freed from bondage. 
Alternatively, one should write the mantra and the person’s name on a slip of birchbarkSkt. 
omits “and the name”; Tib. 
omits “birchbark.” 
and wear it on one’s head. 
Then a bound person will be freed from bondage. 
Tenth Mantra oṁ tāraṇi tāraya mocani mocaya mokṣaṇi mokṣaya jīvaṃvarade svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Tāraṇī, liberate! 
Mocanī, release! 
Mokṣaṇī, set free! 
Jivaṃvaradā, svāhā! 
{6} This king of mantras, correctly recited, will accomplish all actions. 
One should anoint a pregnant woman’s birth canal with sesame oil incanted seven times. 
Then she will give birth with ease. 
A pregnant woman will also give birth easily after drinking a handful of water incanted seven times. 
By reciting the mantra continuously, one will free oneself and others from bondage. 
Wearing a leaf with the mantra on one’s neck or arm will release one from bondage. 
Eleventh Mantra oṁ tāre tu tāre ture mokṣaya jīvaṃvarade svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Tārā, powerful Tārā, please liberate! 
O Jivaṃvaradā, svāhā! 
This king of mantras accomplishes all previously mentioned actions. 
One should write this mantra, interwoven with the beneficiary’s name, with saffron on a piece of birchbark, surround it with beeswax, place it inside a new jar filled with scented water, and worship it in the three periods of the day with offerings of fragrant flowers and so forth. 
The person whose name has been interwoven with the mantra will be victorious in all quarrels and disputes. 
Twelfth Mantra eraṇḍasya vane kāko gaṅgātīram upasthitaḥ&#160;| pibatu dūtaḥ pānīyaṃ viśalyā bhavatu gurviṇī&#160;|| The crow in a thicket of palma christi Roosting on the bank of Ganges— The messenger—may he drink water! 
May the pregnant woman be delivered of her child! 
One should give the messenger who has arrived a drink of three handfuls of water incanted with this mantra seven times. 
Then the pregnant woman will give birth with ease. 
Thirteenth Mantra oṁ amaraṇi jīvantīye svāhā | Oṁ, Amaraṇī! 
Svāhā to Jīvantī! 
This king of mantras, duly recited, can accomplish all endeavors. 
After water incanted with it has been drunk, blisters will not appear. 
One should incant turmeric, yellow myrobalan, costus, etc., and rub it into a wound caused by a venomous spider, a monkey, or skin eruptions.Tib. 
omits “spider” 
but adds “snake.” 
Then one will become well. 
At the onset of any type of illness, one will become well by tying a mantra knot. 
A person who is about to die will, by reciting the mantra continuously, live one hundred years. 
By offering a homa of [incanted] sesame and ghee, one will pacify all ailments. 
By drinking an herbal remedy incanted with this mantra, one will become free from all diseases. 
One should besmear an ailing body part with [incanted] butter, clarified one hundred times. 
Then the part will become well. 
If one has a headache, one should incant sesame oil and rub it onto one’s head. 
One will become well. 
One should make a dressing of [incanted] water over a festering wound and it will heal. 
In the case of enlargement of the spleen, one should split an eggplant with an [incanted] machete. 
This will make the enlargement disappear. 
One should bring together a root of the five-leaved chaste tree, a root of the margosa tree, and a peacock’s feather, and incant them one hundred and eight times and add incense.According to the Tibetan, it is the incense that should be incanted 108 times. 
This will cure fevers—a one-, two-, three-, or four-day fever, etc. 
It will also chase away ghosts, spirits of the deceased, ghouls, gods, and demons. 
A woman whose child has died can bring that child back to life by bathing it from a jar incanted with the mantra one hundred and eight times. 
{7} A woman who carries this mantra, written on birchbark, on her waist or arm will have her fetus protected. 
When one recalls this mantra in battle, one will meet with victory. 
By using the mantra for cleansingBased on the Tibetan (the Sanskrit is unclear). 
one will remove all diseases. 
Fourteenth Mantra oṁ pādacalane svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Pādacalanā, svāhā! 
This king of mantras, when fully mastered, will accomplish all endeavors after the prescribed preliminary practice. 
When one is in danger of developing the blisters of leprosy, one should drink water incanted with it and the leprosy will not appear. 
If this mantra is written on a leafTib.: “on a leaf or parchment.” 
and placed by the door, the leprosy will not come. 
In all dangers, a homa oblation of sesame mixed with ghee will afford great protection. 
One should incant a crow’s wing, holding it in one’s hand. 
Throwing it onto the roof of any house will then drive out its owner. 
Fifteenth Mantra oṁ piśācī parṇaśabari sarvopadravanāśani svāhā | Oṁ, demoness Parṇaśabarī! 
Remover of all misfortunes, svāhā! 
This great mantra removes all misfortunes that afflict bipeds and quadrupeds and accomplishes all endeavors, even when it has not been fully mastered. 
A homa offering, mantra recitation, meditation,Tib. 
omits “meditation.” 
a mantra knot, a drink of incanted water, or cleansing with incanted water will remove all diseases. 
One should write the mantra with turmeric on birchbark and wear it on one’s arm or neck. 
Thus one will obtain success in business transactions.Tib.: “disputes.” 
One will be cured even of the quartan fever and other recurring fevers. 
One will be rid of the danger of rākṣasas, etc. 
One will be victorious in quarrels and disputes. 
One will become invisible to tigers, alligators, mahoragas, thieves, etc. 
By reciting it non-stop, one will be adored by everyone. 
Sixteenth Mantra oṁ adya tṛtīyā amukasya cakṣuḥ stambhaya ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, now you are the third. 
Stabilize the vision of such-and-such a person! 
Ṭhaḥ ṭhaḥ! 
Svāhā! 
On whichever lunar day one’s sight deteriorates, the name of that day should be written with chalk on a wall or a tablet. 
It should be enclosed three times with three ṭhaḥ syllables.The Devanāgarī letter ṭha has the shape of a circle, and it can therefore be drawn around objects or shapes. 
The visual problem will be cured. 
Seventeenth Mantra oṁ caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa hūṁ phaṭ | Oṁ Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇa, hūṁ phaṭ! 
This king of mantras, pronounced once, burns all evil. 
It affords protection in every way. 
One will remove the danger ofTib.: “possession by.” 
spirits, etc., by pelting them with beans, etc.Tib.: “mustard seeds.” 
Having written this mantra with chalk on a platter, one should hang it by the door. 
{8} This will protect newborn babies. 
One should make a beeswax effigy, four fingers long, and insert this mantra, written along with the name of the person targeted, into its heart. 
If one pierces its mouth with a thorn the opponent’s mouth will be nailed. 
If one pierces its feet, one will stop him moving. 
If one pierces its heart, it will quell his anger. 
Whichever body parts one seizes and pierces with a splinter of human shinbone or an iron nail, his equivalent body parts will decay. 
If one buries the effigy under an enemy’s door, one will drive him out. 
One can also drive an enemy out by throwing incanted ashes from a charnel ground on the lintel of his door. 
Incanting one’s sword will bring victory if one goes into battle. 
To fulfil any need need, one should offer a bali, and that need will be fulfilled. 
Whatever the follower of Mantrayāna desires, whether wholesome or unwholesome, he will accomplish it all merely by reciting the mantra. 
Eighteenth Mantra oṁ kāśe syanda kuśe syanda syanda tvaṃ śūnyaveśmani mama tvaṃ tathā syanda yathā syandasi vajriṇaḥ svāhā | Oṁ, flow into the kāśa grass, flow into the kuśa grass, flow into an empty house! 
Flow for me as you flow for the possessor of the vajra! 
Svāhā! 
For conjunctivitis, relief will come after wiping the eyes. 
Nineteenth Mantra oṁ jambhe mohe hṛdayahṛdayāvartani hūṁ phaṭ svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Jambhā, Mohā! 
You who make one heart turn toward another heart! 
Hūṁ phaṭ! 
Svāhā! 
By rinsing one’s face with water incanted seven times with this king of mantras early in the morning before crows start to caw, one will be adored by everyone. 
When the moon is in the asterism of Puṣya, one should take some lampblack with a garland of white lotuses and cow’s gheeThis clause is unclear both in the Sanskrit and the Tibetan. 
and incant it 108 times. 
Anyone whose eyes have been anointed with this substance will steal the hearts of all wantonTib. 
omits “wanton.” 
women. 
One should blend sandalwood with the root of adhaḥpuṣpikā and make a tika with this substance. 
When the mantra is incanted 108 times, a capable practitioner will be able to appease others’ anger, and will be victorious in disputes and quarrels. 
One who recites the mantra continuously according to the ritual will be able to make a city tremble. 
Twentieth Mantra oṁ stambhani stambhaya jambhani jambhaya mohani mohaya rakṣaṇi rakṣaya māṁ varade siddhalocane svāhā | Oṁ, Stambhanī, immobilize! 
Jambhanī, destroy! 
Mohanī, delude! 
Rakṣaṇī, protect me! 
Varadā, Siddhalocanā, svāhā! 
This heart mantra of Locanā will remove all fear. 
This was the first chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra. 
{9} Chapter 2 One should explain this king of tantras To a disciple who is an awakened Buddhist, Who has many good qualities,Tib.: “who has the potential for good qualities.” 
Who is devoted to his teacher, and who is skilled. 
Oṁ, homage to the god Vimalacandra! 
The world is sustained by truth; It is preserved by truth; Through truth, it abides in Dharma; Truth is eternal as Brahman.In the Tibetan, this verse and the next are transcribed in Sanskrit, like a mantra. 
Truth is the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṃgha; It is the ocean of qualities. 
By these words of truth May you swiftly enter the mirror.We have a play on words here, as darpaṇa can mean “mirror” 
as well as be the name of the mountain of Kubera. 
Both of these meanings are required for the context that follows. 
As here follows: Twenty-First Mantra oṁ sara sara siri siri suru suru merumandarapratīkāśa āviśa āviśa kailāsakūṭaputrāya namaḥ svāhā | Oṁ, run, run! 
Move, move! 
Go, go! 
Become like Mount Meru, become! 
Homage to the Kailāsakūṭaputra! 
Svāhā! 
“Whatever task I can think of, Please explain it to me in its entirety, according to the facts, Regardless of whether it is for one’s own sake, or the sake of another, Whether it is wholesome or unwholesome.”In the Tibetan, this verse is transcribed, like a mantra. 
Early in the morning, in a clean place, one should draw a maṇḍala, set up a jar, and make generous offerings to the god Vimalacandra.Skt. 
omits “to the god Vimalacandra.” 
One should incant the mirror and show it to a boy or girl who is well washed,According to Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo’s commentary, “well washed” 
means “washed with water from the jar.” 
dressed in very clean clothes, anointed with white sandalwood paste and wearing a necklace of sweet-smelling flowers, and uncorrupted by “villagers’ dharma.”“Villagers’ dharma” 
is a euphemism for carnal knowledge. 
Then the mirror will reveal without error what should be done as regards the intended task. 
In the evening, one should wipe the top surface of the maṇḍala disc and make generous offerings to the god, lord Vimalacandra.Tib.: “to the Blessed One and the god Vimalacandra.” 
Having made an offering 108 times, one should go to sleep without speaking. 
The beneficial and harmful results of the task one has in mind will be revealed. 
To those who recite the mantra continuously, the events taking place in the three worlds will be revealed. 
Twenty-Second Mantra oṁ śravaṇapiśācini muṇḍe svāhā | Oṁ, Śravaṇapiśācī, Muṇḍā, svāhā! 
{10} If one stands under a belleric myrobalan tree or under a banyan tree and silently recites the mantra 100,000 times, one will attain success. 
Muṇḍā, whispering in one’s ear,Tib. 
omits “Muṇḍā, whispering in one’s ear.” 
will recount all that is happening in the three worlds. 
Alternatively, bathed and dressed in clean clothes, one should recite it 10,000 times in a secluded place. 
Then one will attain success. 
At night, one should incant costus root 108 times. 
Then, having anointed one’s face and feet with it, one should go to sleep without speaking. 
It will then be revealed in one’s sleep what will be beneficial and what will not. 
Twenty-Third Mantra oṁ namaḥ saptānāṃ samyaksaṃbuddhakoṭīnām&#160;| tadyathā&#160;| oṁ cale cule cunde mahāvidye satyavādini varade kathaya kathaya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, homage to the seven koṭis of perfectly awakened buddhas! 
Just as here follows, Oṁ, Calā, Culā, Cundā, Mahāvidyā, Satyavādinī, Varadā, speak, speak! 
Svāhā! 
If one follows here the same procedure described for the previous mantra, Calā will reveal things in a mirror, a conch, a candle, or a dish of water. 
One who recites the mantra silently, after washing his face with water incanted 108 times, will perceive in his sleep what is beneficial and what is not. 
Twenty-Fourth Mantra oṁ mucili svāhā&#160;| mohani svāhā&#160;| dantili svāhā &#160;| Oṁ, Mucilī, svāhā! 
Mohanī, svāhā! 
Dantilī, svāhā! 
This mantraTib.: “secret mantra.” 
can be mastered by reciting it 10,000 times. 
One should make generous offerings to the blessed noble lord Avalokiteśvara, wash one’s face with water incanted 108 times, and recite the mantra, having set one’s mind on the task to be accomplished. 
If one goes to sleep without speaking, one will behold the lord as one’s own body and learn what will be beneficial and what will not. 
Twenty-Fifth Mantra oṁ prajvala hūṁ phaṭ &#160;| Oṁ, Prajvala! 
Hūṁ, phaṭ! 
This mantra is the heart essence of Lord Lokanātha. 
One will attain success by reciting it one million times. 
If one follows here the same ritual described for the previous mantra, it will be revealed in one’s dreams what is beneficial and what is not. 
Twenty-Sixth Mantra oṁ namaḥ saptānāṃ buddhānām apratihataśāsanānām&#160;| tadyathā&#160;| oṁ kumārarūpeṇa darśaya darśaya ātmano vibhūtiṃ samudbhāvaya svapnaṃ nivedaya yathābhūtaṃ hūṁ hūṁ phaṭ phaṭ svāhā | Oṁ, homage to the seven buddhas whose teachings are inviolable! 
As here follows: Oṁ, show yourself in the form of the Youthful One, show! 
Manifest your power! 
Send me a dream to reveal the way things are! 
Hūṁ, hūṁ! 
Phaṭ, phaṭ! 
Svāhā! 
{11} One should make offerings, according to one’s ability, in front of a painting or a statue of venerable MañjuśrīTib.: “venerable youthful Mañjuśrī.”, or by a memorial that contains his body relics. 
If one recites the mantra seven hundred times, one will oneself behold the lord in a dream and show him to others, too. 
Twenty-Seventh Mantra oṁ karṇapiśāci karṇe me kathaya hūṁ phaṭ | Oṁ, Karṇapiśācī, whisper into my ear! 
Hūṁ phaṭ! 
Beneath a tree inhabited by piśācas, one should observe silence and sit absorbed in the samādhi of conquering the three worlds. 
Then, one should incant meat, fish,The Tib. 
adds “human flesh.” 
and black plum, and with them prepare a bali. 
One should recite the mantra in the three periods of the day. 
On the first day Karṇapiśācī will give a sign. 
Later, she will come, and one will attain success. 
From then on, whispering into one’s ear, she will recount all that is happening in the three worlds. 
After twenty-one days, one will succeed even in killing Brahmā. 
Twenty-Eighth Mantra oṁ caturbhuja ṣaṇmukha vikṛtānana karṇapiśācīm ākarṣaya hūṁ phaṭ&#160;| Oṁ, the four-armed and six-faced one! 
You with a contorted face! 
Please summon Karṇapiśācī! 
Hūṁ phaṭ! 
One should recite [this mantra] in a charnel ground in front of a painting of Yamāntaka. 
After twenty-one daysTib.: “one week.”, Karṇapiśācī will be in one’s control. 
Twenty-Ninth Mantra oṁ buddha curu curu mārge svāhā &#160;| Oṁ, Buddha! 
Curu, curu on the path! 
Svāhā! 
In a memorial containing his relics, or in front of the venerable Buddha, one should recite the mantra 10,000 times as preliminary practice. 
Later, one should make offerings according to one’s ability. 
At bedtime, one should recite the mantra eight hundred times. 
One should go to sleep with the following question in one’s mind: “What was my past existence, and what will my future existence be?” 
In one’s sleep, one will perceive one’s past and future births, there is no doubt. 
If one is to die within six months, then in one’s dream one will not be able to see one’s own head or those of others. 
Similarly, a boy or a girl whom one sees in an incanted mirror with his or her head invisible will die within six months.The translation is based on the Tibetan. 
The Sanskrit suggests that, rather than the head, one will not see the neck. 
One should make an unguent from malachite and the root of white agastya tree, incant it 108 times, and smear it on one’s eyes. 
One will distinctly see without heads all those who are going to die within six months, whether humans or animals. 
Thirtieth Mantra oṁ svapnavilokini siddhalocane svapnaṃ me kathaya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Svapnavilokinī! 
Siddhalocanā! 
Interpret my dream for me! 
Svāhā! 
{12} This king of mantras works with all the methods previously described. 
Thirty-First Mantra oṁ aditi devadattāṃ me dehi dadāpaya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Aditi, give me such-and-such a girl! 
Please give! 
Svāhā! 
If one recites this mantra surrounded by water, one will be given the girl one has in mind. 
One should recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable. 
By offering a homa of priyaṅgu flowers or palāśa flowers one will obtain great splendor. 
If one recites this mantra at night while performing a homa using the wood of a milk tree, one will obtain any village for which one performs the homa and recitation. 
By performing 100,000 homa rituals with lotuses or bilva fruits, one born into a royal family will obtain the kingdom. 
Others will obtain great splendor. 
When one offers 700,000 homa rituals with any type of flowers, one will obtain inexhaustible wealth. 
Thirty-Second Mantra oṁ jaye vijaye ajite aparājite svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Jayā, Vijayā, Ajitā, Aparājitā, svāhā! 
Reciting this king of the heart mantras of the four sisters 400,000 times, following the same procedures as described previously, will accomplish all the rituals described previously. 
Thirty-Third Mantra oṁ megholkāya svāhā | Oṁ, svāhā to Megholka! 
By offering a homa with flowers of the palāśa tree 100,000 times, using, as an option, firewood from the same tree, one will obtain 100,000 pieces of gold. 
One who wishes for a girl will soon obtain the one he desires. 
Thirty-Fourth Mantra oṁ kamalavikāsini kamale mahālakṣmi rājyaṃ me dehi varade svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Kamalavikāsinī, Kamalā, Mahālakṣmī, give me the kingdom! 
You who grant boons, svāhā! 
This mantra is the essence of Mahālakṣmī. 
When recited continuously, it will bring enormous glory. 
By offering a homa of whatever flowers are available, one will obtain great splendor and any girl one desires. 
By offering 100,000 homas of bdellium pills the size of a kernel of a cotton tree, smeared with the three sweet substances, or 100,000 homas of lotuses, one will obtain a kingdom. 
Thirty-Fifth Mantra oṁ nandini varade kiṇi kiṇi khiṇi khiṇi śriyaṃ me dada vauṣaṭ &#160;| Oṁ, Nandinī! 
You who grant boons! 
Kiṇi, kiṇi! 
Khiṇi, khiṇi! 
Give me splendor! 
Vauṣaṭ! 
This king of mantras is the heart essence of Nandinī. 
It accomplishes all the previously described activities.Tib.: “This king of Nandinī mantras accomplishes all…” 
{13} Thirty-Sixth Mantra oṁ jambhe mohe svāhā &#160;| Oṁ, Jambhā! 
Mohā! 
Svāhā! 
This king of mantras brings the fulfillment of wishes when one makes offerings of oleander flowers to the venerable Tārā and recites the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable. 
Thirty-Seventh Mantra oṁ vasudhāriṇi svāhā &#160;| oṁ śrīvasu svāhā&#160;| oṁ vasuśriye svāhā&#160;| oṁ vasumukhi svāhā&#160;| oṁ vasumatiśriye svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Vasudharā, svāhā! 
Oṁ, Śrīvasu, svāhā! 
Oṁ, Vasuśrī, svāhā! 
Oṁ, Vasumukhī, svāhā! 
Oṁ, Vasumatiśrī, svāhā! 
One should imagine oneself in the form of Jambhala, and visualize in one’s heart, in the center of a moon disk, the goddess Vasudharā, who is of golden color, has two arms, and is adorned with all adornments. 
In the four directions, starting with the east, she is surrounded by four goddesses. 
Her right hand is in a boon-granting gesture, and in her left she is holding grain and a cluster of blossoms. 
Visualizing her like this will bring fulfillment of one’s wishes. 
One should draw a four-sided maṇḍala with cow dung, two hands in diameter, and offer sweet-smellingSkt. 
omits “sweet-smelling.” 
flowers in the three periods of the day. 
When one has done 4,000 recitations, one’s wishes will become fulfilled within six months. 
By offering 400,000 homas of whatever flowers may be available, one will obtain great splendor. 
By reciting the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable, one will ensure great splendor. 
After offering 100,000 homas of bdellium pills, one’s wishes will come true. 
Thirty-Eighth Mantra oṁ vasudhāriṇi amukīṃ kanyāṃ me dehi dadāpaya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Vasudharā, give such-and-such girl to me! 
Cause her to be given to me! 
Svāhā! 
Observing one’s minor vows,Tib. 
omits “observing one’s minor vows.” 
one should bathe and, while in the water, recite this mantra 400,000 times. 
Then one will obtain the girl one desires. 
At night, one should do a homa offering 100,000 times with the wood of a milk tree, including [in the mantra] the name of a village. 
Then one will obtain that village. 
Thirty-Ninth Mantra oṁ vasudhāriṇi svāhā &#160;| oṁ candrakāntyai svāhā&#160;| oṁ dattāyai svāhā&#160;| oṁ vasudattāyai svāhā&#160;| oṁ āryāyai svāhā&#160;| oṁ subhadrāyai svāhā&#160;| oṁ guptāyai svāhā &#160;| oṁ devyai svāhā&#160;| oṁ sarasvatyai svāhā&#160;| Oṁ Vasudharā, svāhā! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Candrakāntī! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Dattā! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Vasudattā! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Āryā! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Subhadrā! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Guptā! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Devī! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Sarasvatī! 
One should draw Vasudharā on a gold, silver, or copper leaf in the center of an eight-petaled lotus. 
On its petals, starting from the east, one should draw the great yakṣiṇīs, Candrakāntī, and so forth. 
One should then enclose it in two leaves and place it in between ghee, honey, and sugar.According to the Tibetan, the ghee, honey, and sugar are inside the two leaves. 
The Sanskrit, however, seems to reflect the standard way of placing the yantra between the three sweet things. 
By following the same procedures as previously described, one will accomplish the tasks previously described. 
{14} Fortieth Mantra In the center: oṁ jambhalajalendrāya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, svāhā to Jambhala, the lord of the waters! 
In the cardinal directions: oṁ maṇibhadrāya svāhā &#160;| oṁ pūrṇabhadrāya svāhā&#160;| oṁ dhanadāya svāhā&#160;| oṁ vaiśravaṇāya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, svāhā to Maṇibhadra! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Pūrṇabhadra! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Dhanada! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Vaiśravaṇa! 
In the intermediate directions: oṁ kelimāline svāhā&#160;| oṁ vicitrakuṇḍaline svāhā&#160;| oṁ sukhendrāya svāhā&#160;| oṁ carendrāya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, svāhā to Kelimālin! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Vicitrakuṇḍalin! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Sukhendra! 
Oṁ, svāhā to Carendra! 
The lord is surrounded by the eight great kingsSkt. 
omits “kings.” 
of the yakṣas, and accompanied by the goddess Vasudharā. 
He is of golden color, holding a mongoose and a citron, with a protruding belly, and adorned with all the jewel ornaments. 
The yakṣa lords, for their part, are accompanied by the yakṣiṇīs mentioned. 
The lord can even grant the rulership of the three worlds to those who meditate, make offerings during the three periods of the day, and recite the mantras, or to those who offer eight hundred handfuls of water. 
One who recites this early in the morning, before crows start to caw, while standing in water, will have an inexhaustible accumulation of wealth. 
Alternatively, on a golden plate one should engrave Vasudharā surrounded by the yakṣiṇīs, and on a second plate Lord Jambhala surrounded by the yakṣas. 
One should join them together and wearTib.: “serve.” 
them. 
Then the lord will grant the eight great siddhis, not to mention other siddhis. 
This was the second chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra. 
{15} Chapter 3 Forty-First Mantra oṁ vajratīkṣṇa duḥkhaccheda prajñājñānamūrtaye&#160;| jñānakāya vāgīśvara arapacanāya te namaḥ&#160;|| Oṁ, Vajratīkṣṇa! 
You who cut through suffering! 
The embodiment of wisdom and knowledge! 
The body of knowledge, Vāgīśvara— Homage to Arapacana! 
One should visualize oneself in the form of Lord Mañjuvajra Siddhaikavīra, white like the light of the autumn moon. 
In his left hand he is holding a blue lotus and his right hand is in the boon-granting gesture. 
He is the pure sphere of phenomena, shining forth from his primordially unborn nature.In the Tibetan the last sentence is transcribed as a Sanskrit mantra. 
In the Sanskrit, however, it is impossible to take it as such. 
After twenty-one days one will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī.The translation “the speech of Sarasvatī” 
is based on emended Sanskrit reading (sarasvatīṃ vāṇīm to sarasvatīvāṇīm). 
Within six months, one will accomplish Vāgīśvara. 
One will see Vāgīśvara right in front of oneself and remember everything one has heard. 
If, early in the morning, over the period of one month, one drinks half a tola of sweet flag, incanted 108 times, with milk, oil, or ghee, one will cure dullness,Tib. 
omits “dullness.” 
stammering, or dumbness; one’s voice will become like that of a love-intoxicated cuckoo; and one’s speech will be distinct and sweet. 
After six months of practice, the treatises one has not heard will become clearly known, and those that have been learned will not be forgotten. 
One will be able to retain whatever one has learned. 
Forty-Second Mantra oṁ vākyedaṃ namaḥ&#160;| Oṁ, Vākya! 
Homage to you! 
This is the heart mantra of the venerable Vāgīśvara. 
One who is practicing this mantra while absorbed in the samādhi described earlier can accomplish all the tasks that were previously mentioned. 
One should gather 100,000 jasmine flower buds and descend into the waters of a great river flowing toward the ocean to where the water reaches up to one’s neck. 
Reciting this mantra, one should throw the buds, one by one, into the stream. 
Should any bud float against the stream, one should swallow it without touching it with one’s teeth. 
Then one will be granted the ability to remember everything that has been learned. 
Similarly, by offering 400,000 homas of any type of flower, one will become identical to Vāgīśvara. 
Early in the morning, one should prepare a maṇḍala disc using one cat’s paw“Cat’s paw” 
is a particular measure of weight. 
The Tibetan suggests “four karṣas.” 
of powdered pennywort and incant it 108 times. 
One should then make as many offerings to Lord VāgīśvaraSkt. 
omits “Vāgīśvara.” 
as one can, and drink the powder with ghee or fermented rice water. 
Within six months one will be able to remember whatever one has learned; one will be eloquent and have a sweet voice. 
This king of mantras will be mastered if one recites it 100,000 times for each syllable according to the procedure of the preliminary practice. 
Later, during a lunar eclipse or a solar eclipse, one should hold a sword wrought from fine iron in one’s hand, and recite the mantra while the moon is invisible, until it reappears. 
One will then become a vidyādhara of the sword. 
In the same way one may use the mantra to empower a wheel, a scepter, a trident, an arrow, a hammer, a noose, and so forth. 
After that, one should refine and empower the elixirs of long life. 
One should prepare the substances for an eye ointment, a tika ointment, an ointment for the feet, a salve of enthrallment, etc., and empower them. 
One should fill up a dish with either milk or yogurt mixed with rice, together with ghee and sugar. 
One should recite the mantra while covering it with one’s hand {16} and then eat it. 
Then one will live for five hundred years. 
One should put some beans in one’s mouth and recite the mantra. 
If sprouts come forth,Tib.: “if they are swallowed.” 
one will become eloquent, learned, skilled in writing, and able to remember all that one has learned. 
If one offers 100,000 homas of lotuses, the lord will clearly appear before one. 
With 100,000 homas of bilva fruits, one will obtain the kingship of the triple universe. 
If one offers 400,000Tib. 
omits “400,000.” 
homas of whatever kind of flowers may be available, one will obtain mastery of speech. 
With 400,000 homa offerings of five types of grain smeared with ghee, one will be able to summon a yakṣiṇī or a girl from the pātāla. 
In the same way, one should offer five types of wood. 
Practiced continuously, the mantra will even lead to the state of awakening in this very lifetime. 
Forty-Third Mantra oṁ hrīḥ hūṁ&#160;| Oṁ hrīḥ hūṁ. 
This king of mantras will grant the same result. 
Forty-Fourth Mantra oṁ hrīḥ mahāmāyāṅge mahāsarasvatyai namaḥ&#160;| Oṁ, hrīḥ, Mahāmāyāṅgā! 
Homage to Mahāsarasvatī! 
This heart mantra of the venerable, noble Tārā accomplishes all actions. 
Reciting the mantra “Oṁ, all phenomena are pure by nature. 
I am pure by nature on both the outside and inside,”Skt.: oṁ prakṛti­pari­śuddhāḥ sarva­dharmāḥ prakṛti­pari­śuddho ‘haṃ sabāhyābhyantaram &#160;| one should meditate that everything animate and inanimate, as well as oneself, is pure by nature. 
One should visualize a white lotus seven hands in diameter, on top of it a moon disk, and in the center of the moon disk the goddess in all her splendor, one hand holding a lotus and the other displaying the boon-granting gesture. 
The nature of the Blessed Lady’s body is great compassion. 
She is there solely to benefit others. 
She delights in granting practitioners the siddhis they desire. 
She is white like the rays of the autumn moon, anointed with cream of white sandalwood, and beautifully adorned with flowers.Skt. 
omits “anointed with cream of white sandalwood, and beautifully adorned with flowers.” 
She is dressed in white garments; pearl necklaces, white and so forth,Tib. 
omits “white, and so forth.” 
gleam on her chest, and many jewels adorn her body. 
She illuminates the endless and limitless world sphere with thousands of flashing light rays. 
She has the form of a twelve-year-old girl, her body in all the fresh beauty of budding youth. 
One should visualize oneself thus in the form of Mahāsarasvatī, with Prajñā in front, Medhā to the right, Mati behind, and Smṛti to the left—each goddess beautiful, with the same characteristics as just described. 
Then, in the area of one’s navel, in the center of a moon disc, one should visualize a white syllable oṁ. 
Now one should recite the mantra, visualizing its complete garland as the nature of speech emerging from the syllable oṁ in an unbroken stream.Tib. 
omits “in an unbroken stream.” 
The follower of Mantra, with his mind wholly focused on this practice and his body disciplined, sitting silently in the center of a sun disc the color of red lotus,Instead of “in the center of a sun disc of the color of red lotus,” 
the Tibetan has “in the navel of the goddess.” 
will obtain the speech of Sarasvatī within one month. 
Within three months he will succeed even in the slaying of Brahmā. 
Within six months, he will become equal to Sarasvatī. 
{17} One should drink well-prepared Sarasvatī’sInstead of “well prepared Sarasvatī’s…” 
the Tibetan seems to be saying, “in order to accomplish Sarasvatī.” 
The epithet sārasvata is again used to qualify ghee in the section of the forty-sixth mantra below. 
ghee Incanted seven times Together with goat’s milk, yellow myrobalan, the three hot substances, Pāṭhā, ugrā, drum-stick plant, and salt. 
A wise person should cook one prastha of ghee With four times the amount of milkTib.: “goat’s milk.” 
And one pala of each of the ingredients mentioned previously, Slowly, on a low fire. 
If one consumes it for just one month One will obtain an unsurpassable gift of language. 
After a preliminary practice of six months, One will attain the state of Vāgīśvara. 
One will master language by licking Sweet flag, licorice, spiked ginger lily, siṃhī, Pathyā, nāgara, and dīpaka, Together with costus, kaṇa, and cumin. 
Early in the morning, one should make offerings to the goddess With fragrant flowers and so forth. 
By eating the above ingredients, incanted seven times, One will become able, within six months, to remember what one hears. 
Within three months one will become a master of speech, And within one month one becomes an intelligent person. 
One will have a sweet voice Like a cuckoo intoxicated with love. 
Early in the morning one should incant seven times Himalayan yellow myrobalan And Himalayan sweet flag. 
One should leave them standing for one month and then eat them. 
Within a month one will become an intelligent person, A master of language with a beautiful voice, and full of knowledge. 
Within six months one will be able to remember Everything that one has learned. 
Forty-Fifth Mantra oṁ vāgvādini vācaṃ me niyaccha sarasvati mahāśvete svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Vāgvādinī, grant me the gift of speech! 
Sarasvatī! 
Mahāśvetā! 
Svāhā! 
This heart mantra of the Great White Goddess born from a lotusThe translation “born from a lotus” 
is based on the Tibetan and on the emended Sanskrit reading (°āmbujāyāḥ to °āmbujajāyāḥ). 
accomplishes all the tasks described previously. 
Forty-Sixth Mantra oṁ arkamālini kiṇi kiṇi khiṇi khiṇi svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Arkamālinī! 
Kiṇi kiṇi! 
Khiṇi khiṇi! 
Svāhā! 
One should visualize oneself as the youthful lord Mañjuvajra Siddhaikavīra. 
He is free from the afflictions, holds a book that embodies all statements,Skt. 
omits “that embodies all statements.” 
and brandishes the sword of wisdom in his right hand. 
In front of him, one should visualize the sunlight-garlanded Mahāsarasvatī; behind him, Mahāśrī; to his right, Keśinī; and to his left, Upakeśinī. 
One should visualize them as white like the autumn moon and adorned with every ornament.Tib. 
omits “adorned with every ornament.” 
While resting in this visualization one should first make offerings to the best of one’s ability {18} and then recite this mantra 400,000 times following the procedures of the preliminary practice as already described. 
Then, one should incant one pala of Sarasvatī’s ghee or pennywort ghee. 
Next, one should visualize that Sarasvatī offers this substance to oneself with her hand. 
Absorbed in samādhi, one should drink it. 
Here is the recipe for this ghee mixed with pennywort. 
One should cook one prastha of ghee With the juice of pennywort and milk. 
One should add to it The following herbs and powdersTib. 
omits the sentence “One should add… powders: Turmeric, jasmine, and turpeth, Together with yellow myrobalan. 
One should use one pala of each of these; The remaining ingredients are, traditionally, one karṣa. 
Also, pepper and the fruits of viḍaṅga, Together with salt and sugar— One should blend all this together And cook it slowly on a low fire. 
Then, by merely eating it One will attain an unequalled purity of speech. 
By doing this for seven days, One’s voice will equal the kiṃnaras. 
By doing this over a period of one month, One will become full of knowledge. 
By doing this for three months, One will excel in being able to remember whatever one hears. 
Within six months one will become, in reality, Equal to Vāgīśvara. 
One will conquer the eighteen types of leprosy And the seven types of tuberculosis. 
Forty-Seventh Mantra oṁ anantajñānaśriye mañjuśriye namaḥ&#160;| Oṁ, homage to Mañjuśrī who has the infinite splendor of knowledge! 
One should visualize oneself in the form of Vāgīśvara, surrounded by the four goddesses as described before, and recite the mantra according to the procedure previously set out. 
Then one will be able to perform all the rites already mentioned. 
Forty-Eighth Mantra oṁ arapacana dhīḥ svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Arapacana, dhīḥ! 
Svāhā! 
In an isolated place, one should draw a maṇḍala and make offerings to the blessed Vāgīśvara and to one’s precious guru. 
Then, one should sit on a comfortable seat and arouse the mind set upon awakening. 
Afterward, one should recite three times the mantra “Oṁ, all phenomena are pure by nature; I am pure by nature,”Skt.: oṁ svabhāva­śuddhāḥ sarvadharmāḥ svabhāva­śuddho ’ham &#160;| and, considering oneself and everything else to be naturally pure, bring emptiness directly to mind. 
{19} One should then visualize oneself, instantaneously arisen, upon a white lotus and a moon disk; one is white in color, holding a book and a sword. 
On the right side of oneself as Vāgīśvara is Keśinī, and on one’s left, Upakeśinī. 
Each of them is white and holds a red lotus. 
In front is Jālinīprabha,The Tibetan reflects the reading “Sūryaprabha,” 
which is another name for Jālinīprabha. 
of white color, astrideTib. 
omits “astride.” 
a sun disk and holding a blue lotus. 
Behind, one should visualize Candraprabha, astrideTib. 
omits “astride.” 
a moon disk and holding a blue lotus. 
Then, in one’s heart, one should visualize the syllable a, radiating blazing streams of light, which is then transformed into an eight-spoked wheel, extremely ornate as it is the nature of the complete range of speech. 
One should vizualize the wheel clearly and consider that it is rapidly revolving. 
Practicing in this way, one will come to know all the treatises clearly within six months as regards both their meaning and composition, even if one has never heard them before. 
After one year, one will become equal to Vāgīśvara. 
This was the method of the wheel of Arapacana. 
Forty-Ninth Mantra oṁ vāgīśvara muḥ&#160;| Oṁ, Vāgīśvara, muḥ All the results mentioned previously will come to the person who recites this mantra. 
One should visualize, in the center of a circle, the syllable muḥ surrounded by a garland of flames. 
This is called the circle of wisdom procedure. 
Fiftieth Mantra oṁ dharmadhātuvāgīśvara muḥ svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Vāgīśvara of the sphere of phenomena, muḥ! 
Svāhā! 
In the same order as just described, one should imagine oneself as having the nature of the five deities. 
Then, one should visualize a sixteen-spoked wheel with the syllable muḥ in its center. 
To those who visualize this or an eight-spoked wheelTib. 
omits “or an eight-spoked wheel.” 
will come the results previously mentioned. 
Fifty-First Mantra oṁ vajratīkṣṇa varada muḥ svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Vajratīkṣṇa, the boon giver, muḥ! 
Svāhā! 
One should visualize oneself as the syllable muḥ. 
Then, as it transforms, one instantaneously becomes Vāgīśvara, the sole hero, who, like a blazing fire, illuminates the entire environment. 
In one’s heart one should visualize the syllable oṁ, which is then transformed into a sun disk that illuminates all worlds, shining with a hundred thousand rays. 
By meditating thus, within six months the practitioner will become equal to Vāgīśvara and will obtain all the results previously described. 
This was the third chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra. 
{20} Chapter 4 Fifty-Second Mantra oṁ lavaṇāmbho ’si tīkṣṇo ’si udagro ’si bhayṃkara | amukasya daha gātrāṇi daha māṃsāni daha tvacam nakhāny api daha asthīni asthibhyo majjakaṃ daha&#160;| lavaṇaṃ chindati lavaṇaṃ bhindati lavaṇaṃ pacati&#160;| kṣoṇitalavaṇe hriyamāṇe kuto nidrā kuto ratiḥ&#160;| yadi vasati yojanaśate nadīnāṃ ca śatāntare&#160;| nagare lohaprākāre kṛṣṇasarpakṛtākule&#160;| tatraiva vaśam ānīhi lavaṇabandhapuraskṛta&#160;| oṁ ciṭi ciṭi vikloli amukaṃ sadhanaparivāram eva samānaya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Lavaṇāmbha! 
You are fierce! 
You are vast! 
O terrifying one! 
Burn the limbs of such-and-such! 
Burn his flesh! 
Burn his skin! 
Burn even his nails! 
Burn his bones and the marrow in his bones! 
He cuts the salt, breaks the salt, and cooks the salt. 
When the salt of the earth is being seized, how could one sleep, how could one find pleasure? 
If such-and-such dwells a hundred leagues away, behind a hundred rivers, in a city surrounded by iron walls and protected by cobras—at that very place, enthrall that person, having first bound the salt. 
Oṁ, ciṭi, ciṭi! 
Vikloli! 
Please bring here such-and-such a person! 
Svāhā! 
As a preliminary practice, one should perform 10,000 recitations before commencing the sādhana practice. 
Here, one should visualize oneself as the noble lord Avalokiteśvara, standing beneath a blossoming aśoka tree. 
He is red in color and wears red garlands,Tib. 
omits “red garlands.” 
red clothes, jewelry, and unguents. 
He has a distinctively erotic appearance and in his four arms he holds a noose, a goad, a bow, and an arrow. 
He is accompanied by two goddesses, Tārā and Bhṛkuṭī, who stand to his right and left respectively. 
Visualizing oneself like this, one should offer, in the three periods of the day, 108 homa offeringsTranslation based on the Tibetan. 
The Sanskrit suggests “figurines made of salt.” 
of salt. 
After seven days, one will succeed in enthralling a man or a woman. 
After twenty-one days, one will be able to enthrall an eminent person. 
One should make an effigy from beeswax mixed with salt in the shape of the target person, four fingers in size. 
Then one should heat up that effigy at the three junctions of the day above the smokeless embers of cutch tree wood while saying the mantra aloud. 
Whoever’s name is included in the mantra, that person will become enthralled. 
One should give the target salt mixed with vajra water after incanting it 108 times. 
Then the target will become enthralled simply by drinking it. 
Fifty-Third Mantra oṁ lavaṇāmbho ’si tikṣṇo ’si udagro ’si hṛdayaṃgama amukasya hṛdayaṃ pītaṃ nāsti loke cikitsakaḥ oṁ ciṭi ciṭi vikloli vikloli mahāvikloli mahāvikloli amukaṃ me vaśam ānaya svāhā&#160;| Oṁ, Lavaṇāmbha! 
You are fierce! 
You are vast! 
You touch the heart! 
The heart of such-and-such a person is drunk. 
There is no physician in the world for this. 
Oṁ, ciṭi, ciṭi! 
Vikloli, vikloli! 
Mahāvikloli, mahāvikloli! 
Please enthrall such-and-such a person for me! 
Svāhā! 
Having completed the procedure of the preliminary practice as before, one should drink three handfuls of incanted water with salt in the three periods of the day. 
Whoever’s name one includes, that person will become enthralled. 
One should mix equal amounts of salt and black mustard seed and offer them in a homa offering. 
Whoever’s name is used in the offering, that person will become enthralled. 
Fifty-Fourth Mantra oṁ kurukulle svāhā &#160;| Oṁ, svāhā to Kurukullā! 
{21} This is the heart mantra of the venerable noble Tārā. 
Its invincible power in the activity of enthralling the three worlds is known far and wide. 
One should, while absorbed in the absorption mentioned previously, recite the mantra 100,000 times for each syllable. 
Later, the person to whom one gives flowers, incense, unguents, fragrant powders, or betel will become enthralled. 
By censing oneself with a pleasant-smelling incense, one will be adored by everyone. 
If one offers a homa of red flowers, the person whose name one uses in the homa will become enthralled. 
If one incants food and drink, whoever it is given to will become enthralled. 
To enthrall an important person, one should offer white mustard seeds in the fire. 
Later, on an auspicious lunar day, during an auspicious asterism, etc., one should make offerings to her, the Blessed One. 
Then one should draw a circle with sixteen divisions in the form of a lotus with petals. 
One should draw it on birchbark or cloth using saffron, bovine orpiment, resin, etc. 
In the center of the circle, one should write both the name of the target and that of the practitioner.Tib. 
only mentions the name of the target. 
On the petals, one should write the four syllables ku ru ku llā in combination with the target’s name only.Skt. 
omits “only.” 
On the outside, one should surround this with a threefold circle of oṁ syllables using a red cord and insert the drawing into the heart of an effigy made of beeswax. 
Then, while heating up the effigy over the embers of cutch tree wood at the three junctions of the day, one should draw the effigy’s feet toward oneself. 
Whether one is enthralling a man or a woman, one should pierce the feet with a copper needle and heat them. 
The target will become enthralled. 
One should visualize the wind maṇḍala arisen from the syllable yaṁ. 
Above it, one should visualize the target with disheveled hair, naked, and with a noose tied around his neck. 
One should pull him by the chest with a hook and draw him by means of the mantra which has the force of the wind. 
As he is visualized prostrate at the practitioner’s feet, all that one wants from him can be accomplished. 
With dedicated practice, one will be able to draw even material objectsThe Sanskrit word is piṇḍa, which means a lump of any solid material. 
Tib. 
says “the sky.” 
into one’s presence by mere concentration. 
One should place the mantra in the center of a bowl of ghee, honey, and sugar-candy and, in the three periods of the day, offer flowers and other things to it while reciting the mantra. 
Then one will enthrall whomever one wishes. 
One should make a lamp wick with fibers of white lotus and put lampblack into a dish of unbaked clay along with clarified butter from a brown cow. 
By applying this lampblack, incanted 108 times, to one’s eyes, one will be adored by everyone. 
In the ancestors’ grove,Tib.: “in a cemetery.” 
one should collect lampblack from a wick made of white lotus fibers burning inside a human skull with human fat. 
This should be done at night on the eighth or the fourteenth day of the waning moon. 
By anointing one’s eyes with this lampblack, one will be adored by everyone. 
Fifty-Fifth Mantra amale vimale kuṅkume samayena baddho ‘si&#160;| bindūn bindūn icchayā devo varṣati vidyotayati garjati garjati&#160;| vismayamahārāja samāyita vardhayita hūṁ&#160;| devebhyo manuṣyebhyo gandarvebhyo śikhigrahadeva ānandasya grahaṇāyāgama­nāyākramaṇāya Grahaṇāyāgama­nāyākramaṇāya is a conjectured reading. 
In the manuscripts we have grahaṇīyāgama­nāyākramaṇīya. 
juhomīha svāhā&#160;| In the pure and stainless saffron, you are bound by your pledge. 
The god rains raindrops, raindrops, as he pleases. 
He sends lightning and thunder. 
O amazing great king! 
May he bring prosperity and growth! 
Hūṁ! 
{22} O god of comets and planets, I now offer an oblation to gods, humans, and gandharvas, for the seizing, the coming, and the traversing of happiness,Perhaps a metaphor is intended here: it is the function of the god of comets and planets to control the seizing (i.e., eclipsing), coming, and traversing of heavenly bodies, but here he is meant to apply this function to the “movements” 
of happiness. 
The grammar, however, is not very clear. 
svāhā! 
With this king of mantras one should perform the preliminary ritual. 
Then, in the center of a house yard, one should smear cow dung and delineate the altar space. 
Instead of “delineate an altar,” 
Tib. 
has “shape it into a square.” 
One should spread darbha grass there and set it alight. 
Next, one should take 108 flowers of the giant milkweed shrub and, repeating the mantra, offer the flowers one by one in the fire. 
Then one summons the woman or man one desires. 
An intelligent person, knowing what is described here, should treat it with respect. 
Based on the Tibetan, which is glossed by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo: “An intelligent person who takes pleasure in benefitting others, knowing merely from reading [this text] the mantras that are to be found in it, should practice them with respect.” 
The Sanskrit could be interpreted as, “When they see things accomplished, skillful ones should feel respect.” 
This was the fourth chapter in the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra. 
Here ends the Great Sovereign Tantra of Siddhaikavīra. 
Tibetan Colophon Translated by the great Indian preceptor Dīpaṃkara Śrījñāna and the translator monk Géwai Lodrö, and finalized by the monk Tsultrim Gyalwa. 