The Sūtra of Upholding the Great Secret Mantra 
Homage to the Three Jewels! 
Homage to the Buddha! 
Homage to the Dharma! 
Homage to the Saṅgha! 
Homage to the seven perfectly and completely awakened buddhas, along with their śrāvakas—those who have perfectly gone, and those who have perfectly entered! 
Following this homage: May these incantations be practiced for a purpose! 
May these incantations be accomplished! 
May their purpose—the goal for which they are practiced— Be accomplished! 
Thus have I heard at one time. 
The Blessed One was dwelling in the Jetavana, Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove in Śrāvastī. 
At that time, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, with the gods of the Brahmā realm; Śakra, lord of the gods, with the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three; the four great kings, with the gods of their realm; the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals; and Hārītī with her children and retinue of servants went before the Blessed One, bowed their heads at his feet, and stood to one side. 
Standing there, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, bowed toward the Blessed One with palms joined, and said, “Venerable Blessed One, I rule as lord over the realms of the chiliocosm. 
Venerable Blessed One, when needed I guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms in the chiliocosm. 
Venerable Bliss-Gone Dharma Sovereign, Blessed One, you rule as lord over the realms of the great trichiliocosm. 
Blessed One, when you see fit you, too, guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the great trichiliocosm. 
So, Venerable Blessed One, I request you to guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the trichiliocosm!” 
The Blessed One acquiesced by remaining silent. 
Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, understood that the Buddha had acquiesced by his silence, and at that moment he vanished. 
Subsequently, the Blessed One said to the monks, “Monks, last night I was approached by Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, along with the gods of the Brahmā realm; Śakra, lord of the gods, with the gods of the Heaven of the Thirty-Three; the four great kings, with the gods of the realm of the four great kings; and the twenty-eight great yakṣa generals; and Hārītī with her children and retinue of servants also came. 
“Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, said to me, ‘Venerable Blessed One, I rule as lord over the realms of the chiliocosm. 
Venerable Blessed One, when needed, I guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms in the chiliocosm. 
Venerable Bliss-Gone Dharma Sovereign, Blessed One, you rule as lord over the realms of the great trichiliocosm. 
Blessed One, when you see fit, you also guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the great trichiliocosm. 
So, Venerable Blessed One, I request you to guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the realms of the trichiliocosm!’ “Monks, I acquiesced by not responding to Brahmā, master of the Sahā world. 
Then Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, knowing that I had acquiesced by remaining silent, disappeared at that moment. 
“Monks, this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, was taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past. 
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future. 
And likewise, right now in the present, I will also teach it as an aid for the awakening of buddhahood.” 
Then the Blessed One said to venerable Ānanda, “Ānanda, you are to receive, hold, recite, preach, and master this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra! 
Ānanda, this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, will bring welfare, benefit, happiness, and comfort to the four assemblies. 
tadyathā ubuddhe nibuddhe vibuddhe saṃbuddhe viśvaṣṭabuddhe īhabuddhe tattrabuddhe niyaṃgame chavila apula tapula tāle māle maṅgagamaṅga manana imam vidyā hudume huhume pūrvaprahare&#160;| “Ānanda, this strong and powerful secret mantra, which has been practiced for a long time, was taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past. 
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future. 
And such is also the case at present, as I now teach it to aid in the awakening of buddhahood. 
With this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, I will protect and form a boundary around the person named such-and-such. 
I will form a boundary one league to the east. 
I will form a boundary one league in all the cardinal and intermediate directions. 
tadyathā samuca vimuca palamuca jagadhara madasṭhala nalakamaga samuḥśvavāti vimukti yoga hinasagama aradamula vihaṃgami idiciri vitalākhayo makhayo lagabhidharaṇi pratiprāyogi aḥcakrapati samasraḥvati ilāya milāya bahusaddhya anatama arthavati garavati tikhinitive akanati sakanati samidima vasuvaṭe aṭe aṭe taṭṭa kharusmin kharusmin lahataṃ lahutaṃ sambhara sambhara vatiranataṃ nirutaṃ ila taila saraphala bahuphala satamata daṃṣṭrimata&#160;| “Ānanda, this strong and powerful secret mantra, which has been practiced for a long time, was taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past. 
It will be taught by the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats in the future. 
And such is also the case at present, for I too teach it. 
Brahmā, lord of the Sahā world, teaches it. 
Śakra, lord of the gods, also teaches it. 
The four great kings also teach it. 
The twenty-eight great yakṣa generals also teach it. 
And Hārītī, with her children and retinue of servants, also teaches it. 
“Ānanda, any monk, nun, layman, or laywoman who receives this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, and understands, sees, or performs it, precisely as it has been taught and mastered, will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being for as long as he or she shall live. 
“Ānanda, by the command of the perfectly and completely awakened thus-gone arhats of the past, future, and present, this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, shall guard, protect, look after, and bring peace and well-being to the person named such-and-such. 
It will form a boundary. 
It will form a boundary one league to the east. 
Likewise, it will form a boundary one league to the west. 
It will form a boundary one league to the south. 
It will form a boundary one league to the north. 
It will form a boundary one league in all the cardinal and intermediate directions. 
“Ānanda, there are four who dwell on and off the path of the four great kings.The commentary (gsang sngags chen mo rjes su ’dzin ma’i mdo’i ’bum ’grel, 263b–264a) reads: “The ‘path of the four great kings’ is the four great kings themselves…and those guarded by the four great kings. 
‘Those not on the path” 
refers to the sons of the great kings. 
These four entities garner petty lords and retinues, enacting violence against beings. 
Who are they? 
They cause harm in the east, south, west, and north, such that the 80,000 types of obstructers are also included within these four.” 
Who are they? 
They are Auspicious, Friend to All, Complete, and Glory of Joy. 
Whoever knows their names and families will not be in danger of the great kings, nor will he be in danger of robbers, fire, water, humans, or non-humans. 
“Ānanda, Vajrapāṇi’s older brother called Swift Hand resides in the city known as Cakravālapur. 
Whoever knows his name and family will be guarded, protected, looked after, pardoned, and brought peace and well-being by him. 
On behalf of the person named such-and-such, I beseech and supplicate Vajrapāṇi’s older brother Swift Hand! 
By the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present, all yakṣas, rākṣasas, pretas, piśācas, kumbhaṇḍas, pūtanas, and kaṭapūtanas who seek an occasion and look for an opportunity to harm the person named such-and-such will not find any such opportunity, nor will they be able to quarrel with him! 
“Ānanda, there are fourteen great rākṣasīs. 
They protected the Bodhisattva while he was in his mother’s womb. 
They also protected him during his birth, as a newborn, and while he was being reared. 
Who are they? 
They are Powerful, Stainless, Tumult, Supple, Terrifying Lady, Voice of Jambū, Supreme Seizer, Master, Renowned Female, Amazing Renown, Conflict Lover, Playful Lady, Earth Supporter, and Conflict Engager. 
Whoever knows their names and families will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being by them! 
“Ānanda, there are eight rākṣasīs who steal the vitality of men or women regardless of whether they are asleep or not. 
Who are they? 
They are Horn, Unassailable, Instigator of Evil, Slanderous, Red Female Servant, Greatest, Excellent Eyes, and Terrifying. 
Whoever knows their names and families will be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being by them! 
“Ānanda, there are seven rākṣasīs who travel as far as one hundred miles when they smell the scent of blood. 
Who are they? 
They are Excellent Splendor, Layered Joy, Giver of Various Things, Excellent White Female Servant, Desiring Engagement, Surrounding City, and Mountain Protector. 
Whoever knows their names and families will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon! 
“Ānanda, there is a rākṣasī called Mahākālī with one thousand sons who lives at the seashore and travels 80,000 miles in a single night. 
Whoever knows her name and family will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by her! 
“Ānanda, there are five rākṣasīs who, along with 7,700,000 yakṣas, guard and protect the humans in the Jambu continent. 
Who are they? 
They are Always Insane, Further Insane, Bloated with Power, Bamboo Stick, and Wealthy. 
Whoever knows their names and families will be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by them! 
“Therefore, on behalf of the person named such-and-such, I beseech and supplicate those five rākṣasīs, along with the 7,700,000 yakṣas! 
By the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present, may the person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon! 
tadyathā vīmude vītide picarite pigarite karaṭi karavīra swāri madhuraghoṣe śatahanita bhaṣitaghe akke nakke vika ḍitā vikuṭite viraje vighaṣṭavāte&#160;| “Ānanda, nowhere in the worlds of gods, demons, Brahmā, mendicants, priests, humans, kiṃnaras, and mahoragas have I seen anyone—whether human, non-human, yakṣa, rākṣasa, asura, gandharva, nāga, garuḍa, guhyaka, preta, piśāca, vetāla, kākhorda, kṛtya, pūtana, kaṭapūtana, unmāda, or apasmāra— who, seeking an opportunity to hurt and looking for conflict, was ever able to harm a person guarded, shielded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon by this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra—unless, that is, the ripening of their karma precludes it. 
“Therefore, by the command of the blessed buddhas of the past, future, and present, I will use this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, to guard the person named such-and-such from humans, non-humans, yakṣas, rākṣasas, piśācas, asuras, gandharvas, nāgas, garuḍas, guhyakas, pretas, vetālas, kākhordas, kṛtyas, pūtanas, kaṭapūtanas, unmadas, and apasmāras. 
He will be protected, shielded, brought peace and well-being, granted pardon, and purged of poison. 
“This queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, will intoxicate all those with hostile intentions, ill will, animosity, and rage, as well as all demons, trail guards, fort guards, and customs guards. 
It will intoxicate them, cause paralysis and stupefaction, and seize their hands, feet, minds, and tongues. 
Through this queen of incantations, Upholding the Great Secret Mantra, the person will escape on each and every occasion. 
“Oh wonder! 
Brahmin! 
You transcended anguish, Crossed over existence within the world, And finally, after so long, Saw the transcendence of all resentment and fear! 
“Patience is the supreme austerity; Patience is the supreme nirvāṇa—so proclaims the Buddha. 
As for the ordained who harm others, One who is violent toward others is not a proper renunciant. 
“On the other hand, just as those with eyesight Also have capabilities, The wise, in this world of the living, Avoid misdeeds. 
“To all the buddhas Of present, future, and past I pay homage! 
To all of them I go for refuge! 
“Since in the world it is the bliss-gone arhats To whom the moon goes for refuge, Buddhas, with compassion for the world, Free the moon from Rāhu! 
“ ‘Rāhu! 
The moon dispels darkness. 
Illuminating the sky, It shines with white And pristine light. 
Instead of seizing it in the sky, Instantly release the lantern of creatures!’ “Then, suddenly, Rāhu, with his body trembling and in a sweat Like a sick person, Abruptly released the moon. 
“ ‘Rāhu, why did you, Trembling and in a sweat Like a sick person, Suddenly release the moon?’ “ ‘If, upon uttering these verses of the Buddha, The moon were not released, My head would crack into seven pieces, And even while alive, I would be unhappy.’The commentary (gsang sngags chen mo rjes su ’dzin ma’i mdo’i ’bum ’grel, 274a7) explains this in terms of the next life. 
It states: “Even after dying, one will be reborn in the hell of Endless Torment.” 
“Oh wonder! 
Amazing is the emergence of buddhas Who see the truth! 
If one recites these verses, Rāhu will release the moon. 
“By such truth and true words, as follows: one who is unforgettable to beings appearing in the world is a ‘thus-gone one;’ that he speaks by speaking truly means he speaks by speaking truly at the appropriate time. 
Furthermore, Ānanda, those verses were spoken by the Thus-Gone One to assist in the observation of pure conduct. 
And what is more, Ānanda, the following words will secure the purpose, as well as further assist and ease, whatever function those verses are set to perform: syād athedana svasti mati vilumati praharati kaśumadchi nanda mati vihagrahe vidumati edakṛta ārtha sudṛśabuddhi bodhimati suhudume alakhūme alamite higaraśara āśuha pragaśini&#160;| “Ānanda, the ten roots of seeds and the ten root words of seeds have been spoken by the Thus-Gone One. 
Ānanda, these words will be spoken by Thus-Gone Ones, and will be taught by them; so if people who dwell in their teaching utter them, yakṣas and rākṣasas will perform activities for them like slaves. 
“By such truth and true words, as follows: true words at the irreversible level are called the ‘words that are supreme in the world.’ Those who, of all renunciants, are ‘the most joyful renunciants,’ the perfectly and completely awakened, thus-gone arhats, who have neither fear nor terror, who, neither cowering nor fleeing, lack fear, and who, having abandoned fear and its impetus, are called ‘free of anything that causes one to cry out in hair-raising panic’—these are what is meant by ‘those who speak by speaking truly, those who speak by speaking truly at the appropriate time.’ By their truth and those true words, may the person person named such-and-such have well-being! 
“By such truth and true words, as follows: of all those who observe ethical discipline, controlled conduct, austerities, or pure conduct, those who are known as ‘supreme in the discipline that pleases the noble ones’—by their truth and their true words, may the person named such-and-such have well-being! 
“Of the elders, Ājñātakauṇḍinya, like the eldest of a king’s sons, foremost among those practicing pure conduct, for a long time has passed since his ordination; Mahākāśyapa, supreme among those with few desires who adhere to the qualities from training and have contentment; Śāradvatīputra, supreme among those with great wisdom and eloquence; Mahāmaudgalyāyana, supreme among those with great miraculous powers and great magical abilities; Aniruddha, supreme among those with the divine eye; Ānanda, supreme among the learned; Upālī, supreme among holders of discipline; Pūrṇamaitrāyaṇīputra, supreme among Dharma preachers; Rāhula, supreme among those with respect for the trainings; Vasumallaputra, supreme among those who distribute bedding and cushions; Piṇḍola Bhāradvāja, supreme among those who proclaim the lion’s roar; Kālodāyin, supreme among those who inspire householders; and Sudarśana, supreme among those who are venerated by gods and men—by the truth and true words of these elders, may the person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon. 
He shall be protected from kings, ministers, robbers, fire, water, enemies, and adversaries, and when traveling, lost, asleep, drunk, or careless! 
“By such truth and true words, as follows: among all possible beings—those without feet, with two feet, with four feet, or with many feet; those with form or without form; those with perception, without perception, or neither with nor without perception—the Thus-Gone One is called ‘supreme.’ By his truth and his true words, may the person person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, looked after, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon! 
“By such truth and true words, as follows: in the entire range of conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, freedom from attachment is called ‘supreme.’ By that truth and those true words, may the person person named such-and-such be guarded, protected, embraced, brought peace and well-being, and granted pardon. 
“By such truth and true words, as follows: of all kinds of assemblies, gatherings, multitudes, and retinues, the saṅgha of the Thus-Gone One’s śrāvakas is called ‘supreme.’ By their truth and their true words, may countries, regions, cities, towns, villages, houses, abodes, fields, and this sick patient be guarded, protected, looked after, and brought peace and well-being. 
Boundaries will be formed around them. 
All bhūtas will be turned back. 
Those who steal vitality will be turned back. 
“By such truth and true words, as follows: in order that I—a blessed, perfectly and completely awakened, thus-gone arhat—may end this person’s desire, anger, and ignorance, by the truth and true words of the teaching, explanation, and enunciation of the 84,000 sections of teachings, may the 404 sicknesses of the person named such-and-such come to an end! 
May they be eliminated! 
May they cease! 
May they cease completely!” 
When the Blessed One had spoken, the world, including venerable Ānanda, Brahmā, master of the Sahā world, and all gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised what the Blessed One had said. 
This completes The Sūtra of Upholding the Great Secret Mantra. 
This was translated and edited by the Indian scholars Śīlendrabodhi, Jñānasiddhi, and Śākyaprabha, along with the translator-editor Bandé Yeshé Dé, who then revised it according to the new lexicon and finalized it. 