The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra on Dependent Arising 
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas! 
Thus did I hear at one time. 
The Blessed One was in the Realm of the Thirty-Three Gods, seated on the throne of Indra. 
With him were great hearers such as the venerable Aśvajit; bodhisattva mahāsattvas such as noble Maitreya, noble Avalokiteśvara, and Vajrapāṇi, who were adorned with immeasurable precious qualities; as well as various gods such as the great Brahmā, who is the lord of the Sahā world, Nārāyaṇa, the great Īśvara, Śakra, who is the chief of the gods, and Pañcaśikha, who is the king of the gandharvas. 
On that occasion, the bodhisattva mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara rose from his seat and, having draped his upper robe over one shoulder, knelt down with his right knee on the peak of Mount Meru. 
His palms together, he then bowed toward the Blessed One and addressed to him these words: “Blessed One, these gods all really wish to build a stūpa. 
Now that they are present in this entourage, please teach them the Dharma in such a way so that their merit of Brahmā will increase, and the merit of the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen will increase much more than that of all types of beings in the world of gods, māras, and Brahmā, including renunciants and brahmins.” 
At this, the Blessed One spoke the verses of dependent arising: ye dharmā hetuprabhavā hetuṃ teṣāṃ tathāgato hy avadat teṣāṃ ca yo nirodha evaṃvādī mahāśramaṇaḥ There are multiple variations of this creed found throughout the Buddhist world. 
See Sykes (1856) and Skilling (2003). 
“All phenomena that arise from causes, The Tathāgata has taught their cause, And that which is their cessation; Thus has proclaimed the Great Renunciant. 
“Avalokiteśvara, it is like this. 
This dependent arising is the dharmakāya of all the tathāgatas. 
A person who sees dependent arising sees the Tathāgata. 
Avalokiteśvara, if a faithful son or daughter of a noble family builds, in a remote place, a stūpa the size of a gooseberry fruit, with a central pillar the size of a needle and a parasol the size of a flower of the bakula tree, and inserts this verse of dependent arising which is the dharmadhātu, he or she will generate the merit of Brahmā. 
When such persons pass on from here and die, they will be reborn in the world of Brahmā. 
When they pass on from there and die, they will be reborn with fortunes equaling those of the gods of the Pure Abodes.”This last sentence is omitted in the otherwise identical copies of the work found in the Tantra and Dhāraṇī sections of the Kangyur, Toh 520 and Toh 980, respectively. 
After the Blessed One had thus spoken, the hearers, bodhisattvas, the whole assembly, and the universe of gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas rejoiced and praised his words. 
This concludes the Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra on Dependent Arising. 
Translated and edited by the Indian scholar Surendrabodhi and the principal editor and translator Venerable Yeshe Dé.Mention of the translators is omitted from the colophon in the versions Toh 520 and Toh 980 (see previous note). 
Notes Bibliography Tibetan Texts ʼphags pa rten cing ʼbrel bar ʼbyung ba zhes bya ba theg pa chen poʼi mdo. 
Toh 212, Degé Kangyur, vol. 
62 (mdo sde, tsha), folios 125a–125b. 
Cf. 
also Toh 520, vol. 
88 (rgyud ’bum, na), folios 41a–42a; and Toh 980, vol. 
101 (gzungs ’dus, waṃ), folios 99a–99b. 
ʼphags pa rten cing ʼbrel bar ʼbyung ba zhes bya ba theg pa chen poʼi mdo. 
bka’ ’gyur (dpe bsdur ma) [Comparative Edition of the Kangyur], krung go’i bod rig pa zhib ’jug ste gnas kyi bka’ bstan dpe sdur khang (The Tibetan Tripiṭaka Collation Bureau of the China Tibetology Research Center). 
108 volumes. 
Beijing: krung go’i bod rig pa dpe skrun khang (China Tibetology Publishing House), 2006-2009, vol. 
62, pp 342-344. 
Cf. 
also vol. 
88, pp 183–185; and vol. 
98, pp 324–326. 
ʼphags pa rten cing ʼbrel bar ʼbyung ba’i snying po zhes bya ba theg pa chen poʼi mdo. 
Toh 521, Degé Kangyur, vol. 
88 (rgyud ’bum, na), folio 42a. 
Cf. 
also Toh 981, vol. 
101 (gzungs ’dus, waṃ), folios 99b–100a. 
ʼphags pa rten cing ʼbrel bar ʼbyung ba’i snying po zhes bya ba theg pa chen poʼi mdo. 
Bka’ ’gyur (dpe bsdur ma) [Comparative Edition of the Kangyur], krung go’i bod rig pa zhib ’jug ste gnas kyi bka’ bstan dpe sdur khang (The Tibetan Tripiṭaka Collation Bureau of the China Tibetology Research Center). 
108 volumes. 
Beijing: krung go’i bod rig pa dpe skrun khang (China Tibetology Publishing House), 2006-2009, vol. 
88, p 187. 
Cf. 
also vol. 
98, p 328. 
Works in English Bentor, Yael. 
“On The Indian Origins of the Tibetan Practice of Depositing Relics and Dharanis in Stupas and Images.” 
In Journal of the American Oriental Society 115.2 (1995), pp 248-261. 
Bien, Annie. 
The Sūtra Teaching Dependent Arising with Its Beginning and Divisions (Pratītyasamutpādādivibhaṅganirdeśasūtra, Toh 211). 
84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (forthcoming). 
Boucher, Daniel. 
“The Pratītyasamutpādagāthā and Its Role in the Medieval Cult of the Relics.” 
In Journal of the International Association for Buddhist Studies 14.1 (1991), pp 1-27. 
Dharmasāgara Translation Group. 
The Rice Seedling (Śālistambhasūtra, Toh 210). 
84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (forthcoming). 
Mejor, Mareck. 
“On the Formulation of Pratītyasamutpāda: Some Observations from Vasubhandu’s Pratītyasamutpādavyākhyā.” 
In Agata Bareja-Starzyńska and Mareck Mejor (eds.). 
Aspects of Buddhism: Proceedings of the International Seminar on Buddhist Studies (June, 1994). 
Warsaw: Instytut Orientalistyczny, Uniwersytet Warszawski (1997a), pp 125-138. 
————. 
“On Vasubhandu’s Pratītyasamutpādavyākhyā.” 
In Agata Bareja-Starzyńska and Mareck Mejor (eds.). 
Aspects of Buddhism: Proceedings of the International Seminar on Buddhist Studies (June, 1994). 
Warsaw: Instytut Orientalistyczny, Uniwersytet Warszawski (1997b), pp 139-148. 
Miller, Robert. 
The Chapter on Joining the Renunciate Order (Vinayavastu Pravrajyāvastu, Toh 1). 
84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha (forthcoming). 
Oldenberg, Hermann (ed.). 
The Vinayapiṭakaṃ: One of the Principal Buddhist Holy Scriptures in the Pāli Language, Vol. 
I: The Mahāvagga. 
Oxford: Pali Text Society (1997). 
Reat, N. 
Ross. 
The Śālistamba Sūtra. 
Delhi: Banarsidas (1993). 
Sakaki, Ryōzaburō (ed.). 
Mahāvyutpatti, 2 vols. 
Kyoto: Daigaku Shingonshū (1916 [1925]). 
Salomon, Richard and Gregory Schopen. 
“The Indravarnam (Avaca) Casket Inscription Reconsidered: Further Evidence for Canonical Passages in Buddhist Inscriptions.” 
In Journal of the International Association for Buddhist Studies 7.1 (1984), pp 107-123. 
Skilling, Peter. 
“Traces of the Dharma: Preliminary reports on some ye dhammā and ye dharmā inscriptions from Mainland South-East Asia.” 
In Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient, 90-91 (2003-2004), pp 273-287. 
Sykes, Lieutenant-Colonel. 
“On the Miniature Chaityas and Inscriptions of the Buddhist Religious Dogma, Found in the Ruins of the Temple of Sárnáth, near Benares.” 
In Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1856), vol. 
16, pp 37-53. 
dependent arising rten cing ’brel bar ’byung ba pratītyasamutpāda Thirty-Three Gods gsum cu rtsa gsum Trāyastriṃśāḥ Name of a class of gods in the desire realm. 
There is also an associated heavenly realm, the Realm of the Thirty-Three Gods, which is named after these. 
throne of Indra ar mo nig lta bu’i rdo leb Pāṇḍukambalaśilātalam A huge flat rock, Indra’s throne in the Realm of the Thirty-Three Gods; it is called Pāṇḍukambala, “like a blanket,” 
because it is made of a pale stone reminiscent of thick wollen cloth. 
Sakaki 7127 in the Mahāvyutpatti. 
gandharva dri za gandharva Gandharvas, lit. 
“smell-eaters.” 
A class of deities known for being skilled musicians. 
Also the name of spirits in the bardo state. 
stūpa mchod rten stūpa Reliquary for the remains of the Buddha or holy beings that represents the body of the Buddha. 
māra bdud māra Demon who creates obstacles to practice and enlightenment. 
monk dge slong bhikṣu Fully ordained Buddhist monk. 
nun dge slong ma bhikṣuṇī Fully ordained Buddhist nun. 
layman dge bsnyen upāsaka Male lay devotee who has taken the five precepts. 
laywoman dge bsnyen ma upāsika Female lay devotee who has taken the five precepts. 
dharmadhātu chos kyi dbyings dharmadhātu In combination with pratītya­samutpāda (in this text rten cing ’brel bar ’byung ba chos kyi dbyings), the term dharmadhātu can refer to a type of Buddhist relic which is said to embody the essence of the Buddhist doctrine. 
dharmakāya chos sku dharmakāya Dharmakāya or “body of dharma” 
refers to the Buddha’s realization of reality. 
gooseberry skyu ru ra āmalaka bakula tree ba ku la bakula Indian tree with a very fine flower. 
central pillar srog shing yaṣṭi merit of Brahmā tshangs pa’i bsod nams brahmāpuṇya Brahmic merit or pure merit refers to an extraordinary type of merit which leads to rebirth in the realm of Brahmā. 
Sahā mi mjed Sahā Indian Buddhist name usually referring to the trichiliocosm, the world system that is the universe of ordinary beings, but sometimes only to our own world with four continents around Mount Meru. 
It means “endurance,” 
as beings there have to endure suffering. 
Aśvajit rta thul Aśvajit One of the five ascetics who became the first disciples of the Buddha. 
Maitreya byams pa Maitreya Bodhisattva of loving kindness; the next buddha to follow Śākyamuni. 
Avalokiteśvara spyan ras gzigs Avalokiteśvara First appeared as a bodhisattva beside Amitābha in the Sukhāvati­vyūha. 
The name has been variously interpreted. 
“The lord of Avalokita,” 
Avalokita has been interpreted as “seeing,” 
although, as a past passive participle, it is literally “lord of what has been seen.” 
One of the principal sūtras in the Mahā­sāṃghika tradition was the Avalokita Sūtra, which has not been translated into Tibetan, in which the word is a synonym for enlightenment, as it is “that which has been seen” 
by the buddhas. 
In the early tantras he was one of the lords of the three families, as the embodiment of the compassion of the buddhas. 
The Potalaka Mountain in South India became important in Southern Indian Buddhism as his residence in this world, but Potalaka does not feature in the Kāraṇḍa­vyūha. 
Vajrapāṇi phyag na rdo rje__,__lag na rdo rje Vajrapāṇi First appeared in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if he speaks inappropriately to the Buddha. 
His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mantrayāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇḍavyūha. 
However, although listed (paradoxically along with Avalokiteśvara) as being in the assembly that hears the teaching of this sūtra, in the sūtra itself he is grouped with the worldly spirits that Avalokiteśvara frightens. 
Brahmā tshangs pa Brahmā The personification of the universal force of Brahman, who became a higher deity than Indra, the supreme deity of the early Vedas. 
Nārāyaṇa sred med kyi bu Nārāyaṇa An alternate name for Viṣṇu. 
The Sanskrit is variously interpreted, including as “dwelling in water,” 
but is most obviously “the path of human beings.” 
Īśvara dbang phyug Īśvara One of the most frequently used names for Śiva. 
A deity of the jungles, named Rudra in the Vedas, he rose to prominence in the Purāṇic literature at the beginning of the first millennium. 
Śakra brgya byin Śakra Alternate name for Indra, the king of the gods in Hindu mythology. 
Pañcaśikha zur phud lnga pa Pañcaśikha A gandharva known for playing the lute. 
Great Renunciant dge sbyong chen po Mahāśramaṇa Epithet of the Buddha. 
Mount Meru ri rab Meru; Sumeru According to the ancient Indian cosmological system, Mount Meru is a mountain which forms the centre of the universe. 
Pure Abodes gnas gtsang ma Śuddhāvāsa Name for the five highest levels of existence within the form realm. 
