The Noble Sūtra on Reliance upon a Virtuous Spiritual Friend 
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. 
The Bhagavān was dwelling in the Grove of Twin Sāl-Trees in the vicinityDQ: nyen ’khor; N: nye ’khor. 
of the Malla town of Kuśinagara,DN: ku sha na gyad; Q: ku shi na gyad. 
together with a retinue of śrāvakas. 
Then, when the Bhagavān was about to pass into parinirvāṇa, he addressed the bhikṣus, “Bhikṣus, you should train in this way. 
Bhikṣus, you should train thinking, ‘One should live with a virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support. 
One should not, however, live with a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support.’ ” 
Then, the venerable Ānanda spoke to the Bhagavān, “Honorable One, having come here alone to a secluded place, I had gone into meditative retreat nang du yang dag ’jog; pratisaṃlayana. 
when the following thought arose in my mind: ‘A virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is half the holy life. 
A non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support, however, is not.’ ” 
The Bhagavān replied, “Ānanda, do not say that a virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is half the holy life, but that a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support is not. 
“Why? 
Ānanda, the point is that a virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is the whole, the unadulterated, the complete, the pure, the totally purified holy life, but a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support is not. 
“Why is that? 
Ānanda, it is because, by relying on me as their spiritual friend,This translation is based on the Sanskrit, rather than the Tibetan version of the text which would have to be rendered: “... 
relying on a spiritual friend and on me ... 
.” 
Alsdorf (1961, p 12) remarks that the Tibetan version is faulty at this point. 
sentient beings subject to birth will be completely released from being subject to birth, and sentient beings subject to aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, distress, and agitation will be completely released from being subject to aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, suffering, distress, and agitation. 
“Therefore, Ānanda, you should understand this in the following way alone. 
A virtuous spiritual friend, a virtuous companion, a virtuous support is the whole, the unadulterated, the complete, the pure, the totally purified holy life, but a non-virtuous spiritual friend, a non-virtuous companion, a non-virtuous support is not. 
Ānanda, you should train thinking in this way.” 
When the Bhagavān had spoken these words, the bhikṣus rejoiced and highly praised what the Blessed One had taught. 
This completes The Noble Sūtra on Reliance upon a Virtuous Spiritual Friend.The colophon makes no mention of who the Tibetan translators were, but the Degé catalogue (dkar chag, vol. 
103, lak+Sh+mI, F.134.a.7) states that the text was translated by the Paṇḍita Dharmākara and the Lotsāwa Zangkyong (bzang skyong). 
See Introduction, i.5. 
Notes Abbreviations D Degé Kangyur N Narthang Kangyur Q Peking Kangyur Bibliography ’phags pa dge ba’i bshes gnyen bsten pa’i mdo (Ārya­kalyāṇa­mitra­sevana­sūtra). 
Toh 300, Degé Kangyur, vol 71 (mdo sde, sha), folios 304.b-305.a. 
’phags pa dge ba’i bshes gnyen bsten pa’i mdo. 
bka’ ’gyur (dpe bsdur ma) [Comparative Edition of the Kangyur], krung go’i bod rig pa zhib ’jug ste gnas kyi bka’ bstan dpe sdur khang (The Tibetan Tripitaka Collation Bureau of the China Tibetology Research Center). 
108 volumes. 
Beijing: krung go’i bod rig pa dpe skrun khang (China Tibetology Publishing House), 2006-2009, vol 71, pp 829-831. 
Alsdorf, Ludwig. 
Śaśa-Jātaka und Śaśa-Avadāna. 
In: Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd-und Ostasiens, 5, 1-17, 1961. 
Reprinted in: Wezler, Albrecht (ed.). 
Ludwig Alsdorf, Kleine Schriften. 
Wiesbaden: F. 
Steiner, 1974. 
Bhikkhu Bodhi. 
The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A New Translation of the Samyutta Nikāya. 
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000. 
bhikṣus dge slong bhikṣu A fully ordained monk of the Buddhist Sangha. 
virtuous spiritual friend dge ba’i bshes gnyen kalyāṇamitra A general term to denote a qualified spiritual teacher. 
holy life tshangs par spyod pa brahmacarya Lit. 
“brahma conduct,” 
this denotes the conduct of those who have renounced worldly life and entered the ordained Buddhist Sangha to devote themselves to spiritual study and practice. 
parinirvāṇa yongs su mya ngan las ’das pa parinirvāṇa The name given to the display of the Buddha’s passing away in Kuśinagara. 
four reliances rton pa bzhi pratisaraṇa See note 1. 
Ānanda kun dga’ bo Ānanda The Buddha’s cousin and attendant. 
Kuśinagara ku shi na Kuśinagara The capital of the Malla kingdom, and the town, in the vicinity of which the Buddha passed into parinirvāṇa. 
Malla gyad Malla A kingdom of ancient India situated to the North of Magadha. 