The Noble Prophecy of Śrī Mahādevī 
Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Thus did I hear at one time. 
The Bhagavān was dwelling in Sukhāvatī together with the great saṅgha of bodhisattvas, amongst them the following bodhisattva mahāsattvas of the excellent eon:“Of the excellent eon” 
(bskal pa bzang po’i = bhadrakalpika) missing in Skt. 
Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mahāsthāmaprāpta, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarvanīvaraṇaviṣkaṃbhin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Kṣitigarbha, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Samantabhadra, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ākāśagarbha, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Vajrapāṇi and Bodhisattva Sarvabhayahara, and similarly Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarvamaṅgaladhārin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarvapuṇyalakṣaṇadhārin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Candrasūryatrailokyadhārin, Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Sarvatīrthamaṅgaladhārin, and Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta. 
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara went to the place where the Bhagavān was, paid homage at the Bhagavān’s feet, and remained at one side. 
Śrī Mahādevī also went toward the Bhagavān, paid homage at his feet, and circumambulated him three times. 
Then she also paid homage to all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas who were dwelling in Sukhāvati and remained at one side.Skt. 
“Śrī Mahādevī also went toward the Bhagavān. 
Having circumambulated one hundred thousand times at the Bhagavān’s feet she also paid homage to all the bodhisattva mahāsattvas...” 
The Bhagavān was adorned with many hundreds of thousands of merits and surrounded by as many as ten million tathāgatas. 
As Indra, Brahmā and the guardians of the world all offered their praises and acclaim, the Bhagavān, having gazed at Śrī Mahādevī, addressed Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Avalokiteśvara as follows in his Great Brahmā voice: “Avalokiteśvara, if any one of the kings, ministers, bhikṣus, bhikṣunīs, upāsakas, upāsikās, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas or śūdras retains this praise “The One Hundred and Eight Names“Names” 
omitted in Skt. 
of Śrī Mahādevī which are Renowned as Stainless,” 
then the kṣatriya king’s kingdom, the fears of those beings there, as well as the epidemics and harmful influences will all be pacified,Translated on the basis of the Tibetan. 
Skt. 
has tasya rājñaḥ kṣatriyasya viṣaye teṣāṃ sattvānāṃ sarvabhayety upadravā praśamiṣyanti. 
“In the country of the kṣatriya king, these beings’ misfortunes, i.e. 
‘all fears,’ will be pacified.” 
and no one at all will fear robbers, rogues, humans or nonhumans. 
Wealth, grains, treasuries and stores will all increase, and the Glorious Mahādevī will no doubt abide in the home of this kṣatriya king.” 
Then those bodhisattva mahāsattvas said, “Bhagavāṇ, these words are well said. 
Excellent! 
Excellent! 
Those people who will retain the names of Śrī Mahādevī and who will put them into practice once they have heard themSkt. 
does not have “and who put them into practice once they have heard them.” 
will have those aforementioned qualities and benefits.” 
Then Bodhisattva Mahāsattva Ārya Avalokiteśvara asked the Bhagavān, “Bhagavān, where did Śrī Mahādevī generate her roots of virtue?” 
The Bhagavān replied, “Śrī Mahādevī generated roots of virtue in the presence of tathāgatas as numerous as the grains of sand of the River Ganges. 
O Avalokiteśvara, previously, in the past in a world system called Ratna­saṃbhavā, the tathāgata called Ratna­kusuma­guṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī came forth into the world. 
Śrī Mahādevī generated roots of virtue in his presence and in the presence of many other tathāgatas, too. 
Now, the names of the tathāgatas make Śrī Mahādevī’s roots of virtue flourish and come to fulfillment. 
They stay with her always, these names which here in this world Śrī Mahādevī recites precisely and which dispel all sins, eliminate all offenses, make all effectsSkt. 
sarvakārya “all effects,” 
Tib. 
lus thams cad “all bodies.” 
stainless, gather and increase wealth and grains, eradicate poverty, attract and catch the attention of all gods, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras, and mahoragas, pacifying all epidemics, natural misfortunes,Skt. 
upasarga “natural misfortune,” 
Tib. 
gnod pa “harms.” 
disputes, conflicts, dissensions, and arguments, and which will bring the six perfections to fulfilment. 
They are as follows:The Skt. 
list has been followed. 
The Tibetan (F.248.a-b) has some minor differences from the Sanskrit. 
“Homage to Tathāgata Śrīghana. 
Homage to Tathāgata Ratnakusumaguṇa­sāgara­vaiḍūrya­kanaka­giri­suvarṇa­kāṃcana­prabhāsa­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Gaṅgāsarva­tīrthamukha­maṅgala­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Candana­kusuma­tejo­nakṣatra­prabhāsa­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Samantāvabhāsa­vijita­saṃgrāma­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Guṇasamudrāvabhāsamaṇḍalaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Dhārmavikurvaṇadhvajavegaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Jyotiḥsaumyagandhāvabhāsaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Sattvāśayaśamanaśarīraśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Praṇidhānasāgarāvabhāsaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Suparikīrtitanāmadheyaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Asaṃkhyeyavīryasusaṃprasthitaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Aprameyasuvarṇottaprabhāsaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Sarvasvarāṅgaruta­nirghoṣa­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Prajñāpradīpā­saṃkhyeya­prabhā­ketu­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Nārāyaṇavratasannāha­sumeru­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Brahmaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Maheśvaraśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Candrasūryaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Gambhīradharmaprabhārājaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Gaganapradīpābhirāmaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Sūryaprabhāketuśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Gandhapradīpaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Sāgaragarbhasaṃbhavaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Nirmitameghagarjanayaśaḥ­śrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Sarvadharmaprabhāsavyūhaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Drumarājavivardhitaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Ratnārciḥparvataśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Jñānārciḥsāgaraśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Mahāpraṇidhivegaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Mahāmeghaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Smṛtiketurājaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Indraketudhvajarājaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Sarvadhanadhānyākarṣaṇaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Saumyākarṣaṇaśrī. 
Homage to Tathāgata Lakṣmyākarṣaṇaśrī. 
“Having treated these names of tathāgatas with veneration, one should retain and recite them, and in this way the merit of a son or daughter of a noble family will increase immensely. 
“Now, all the tathāgatas made the following prophecies concerning Śrī Mahādevī: ‘Śrī Mahādevī, in the future you will become the tathāgata, the arhat, the truly complete buddha called Śrīmaṇi­ratna­sambhava in the world system called Śrī­mahā­ratna­pratimaṇḍitā. 
And that world system will be adorned with various sorts of divine jewels. 
This very tathāgata will spread light in that world system, and those bodhisattvas dwelling there in that world will spontaneously become radiant and have immeasurable life spans. 
The word buddhadharmasaṅgha will also come down from the sky, and the bodhisattvas who will be born in that buddha field will all be born from the centers of lotuses.’ “What is the twelve-line praise with one hundred and eight names that is renowned as being stainless?
Skt. 
dvādaśadaṇdakaṃ ... 
stotram, but Tib. 
has the puzzling stod pa brgyad cu gnyis pa “eighty two praises.” 
“O fearless Avalokiteśvara, please hearken to the names of Śrī Mahādevī. 
They are as follows:The Tibetan and Sanskrit lists of names differ somewhat. 
We have followed the Sanskrit and indicated differences from the Tibetan in notes. 
Sarvatathāgatābhiṣiktā (She who was Empowered by All Tathāgatas), Sarvadevatābhiṣiktā (She who was Empowered by All Gods), Sarvatathāgatamātṛ (Mother of All Tathāgatas), Sarvadevatāmātṛ (Mother of All Gods), Sarvatathāgataśrī (Glory of All Tathāgatas), Sarvabodhisattvaśrī (Glory of All Bodhisattvas), Sarvāryaśrāvakapratyekabuddhaśrī (Glory of All Āryaśrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas), Brahmaviṣṇumaheśvaraśrī (Glory of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara), Mahāsthānagataśrī (Glory Present in Great Places),Tib. 
lha la sogs pa thams cad kyi dpal “Glory of All Gods, etc.” 
Sarvadevatābhimukhaśrī (Glory in the Presence of all Gods),Tib. 
gnas thams cad na yod pa’i dpal “Glory Present in All Places.” 
Sarvadevanāgayakṣa­gandharvāsura­garuḍa­kinnara­mahoraga­śrī (Glory of All the Gods, Nāgas, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garuḍas, Kinnaras and Mahoragas), Sarvavidyādharavajrapāṇi­vajra­dhara­śrī (Glory of All the Vidyādharas, Vajrapāṇi and Vajradharas), Catuḥpañcalokapālaśrī (Glory of the Four and the Five Guardians of the World), Aṣṭagrahāṣṭāviṃśatinakṣatraśrī (Glory of the Eight PlanetsThe eight planets: (1) Sun, (2) Earth’s moon, (3) Mars, (4) Mercury, (5) Jupiter, (6) Venus, (7) Saturn and (8) Eclipse-maker (Rāhula). 
and Twenty-Eight ConstellationsAccording to the ancient Indian traditions, twenty-eight constellations lie on the path of the moon during its complete circuit through the plane of the ecliptic. 
For a list of the twenty-eight, see Monier Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary, s.v. 
nakṣatra.), Oṃ Sāvitrī (Daughter of SavitraSavitra is a Vedic solar deity, an Āditya or descendant of the mother of the gods, Aditi.), Dhātrī (Nurse), Mātṛ (Mother), Caturvedaśrī (Glory of the Four Vedas), Lakṣmī (Goddess of Prosperity), Bhūtamātṛ (Mother of Sentient Beings), Jayā (She who is Victorious), Vijayā (She who Conquers), Gaṅgā (She who is the Ganges), Sarvatīrthā (She of All Holy Places), Sarvamaṅgalyā (She who Confers All Auspiciousness),The Tibetan (see glossary under “Sarvatīrthā”) treats these two epithets as one, i.e. 
“She who Confers the Happiness of All the Holy Places.” 
Vimalanirmalakaraśrī (Glory that Makes One Stainless and Pure), Sarvapāpahantrī (She who Slays All Sins), Nirmadakarā (She who Humbles), Candraśrī (Glory of the Moon), Sūryaśrī (Glory of the Sun), Sarvagrahaśrī (Glory of All the Planets), Siṃhavāhinī (She who Rides upon a Lion), Śatasahasrakoṭipadma­vivara­saṃcchannā (She who is Enveloped by a Display of One Hundred Thousand Crore Lotuses),The Tibetan (see glossary entry) has “She who is Enveloped by a Hundred Thousand Supreme Lotuses.” 
Padmā (She who has Lotuses), Padmasambhavā (She who was Born from a Lotus), Padmālayā (She whose Abode is a Lotus), Padmadharā (She who Holds a Lotus), Padmāvatī (She who is Endowed with Lotuses), Anekaratnāṃśumālā (She who has a Garland of Many Light Rays that are like Jewels), Dhanadā (She who Brings Wealth), Śvetā (Fair One), Mahāśvetā (Great Fair One), Śvetabhujā (She who has Fair Arms), Sarvamaṅgaladhāriṇī (She who Possesses All Auspiciousness), Sarvapuṇyopacitāṅgī (She whose Body Consists of All Collections of Merit), Dākṣāyaṇī (Daughter of DakṣaA Hindu creator god. 
His daughter is the consort of Shiva.), Śatasahasrabhujā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Arms), Śatasahasranayanā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Eyes), Śatasahasraśirā (She who has One Hundred Thousand Heads), Vividhavicitramaṇimaulidharā (She who Bears a Diadem of Many Sorts of Multicolored Jewels), Surūpā (She who has a Beautiful Form), Viśvarūpā (She who has All Different Forms), Yaśā (Renowned One), Mahāyaśā (Highly Renowned One), Saumyā (Benign One), Bahujīmūtā (She of the Many Clouds), Pavitrakeśā (She whose Hair is Purity), Candrakāntā (She who is Lovely like the Moon), Sūryakāntā (She who is Lovely like the Sun),The terms candrakānta and sūryakānta also regularly refer to gems, i.e. 
moonstone and sunstone respectively. 
Śubhā (Virtuous One), Śubhakartrī (She who Brings About Virtue), Sarvasattvābhimukhī (She who is Disposed towards All Sentient Beings), Āryā (Noble One), Kusumaśrī (Glory of the Flowers), Kusumeśvarā (She who is the Sovereign of the Flowers),Tib. 
“She Who Abides in Flowers.” 
Sarvasumeruparvatarājaśrī (Glory of the Entire King of Mountains, Mt. 
Sumeru), Sarvanadīsaricchrī (Glory of All Rivers and Streams),Tib. 
“Glory of All Rivers and Lakes.” 
Sarvatoyasamudraśrī (Glory of the Ocean of All Waters), Sarvatīrthābhimukhaśrī (Glory of Turning Towards All the Holy Places), Sarvauṣadhitṛṇavanaspati­dhana­dhānya­śrī (Glory of All Medicinal Herbs, Grasses, Trees, Wealth and Grains), Hiraṇyadā (She who Gives Gold), Annapānadā (She who Gives Food and Drink),Tib. 
“She who Gives Food and Clothing.” 
Prabhāsvarā (She of the Clear Light), Ālokakarā (She who Illuminates), Pavitrāṅgā (She of the Pure Body), Sarvatathāgatavaśavartinī (She who has Power over All Tathāgatas), Sarvadevagaṇamukhaśrī (Glory when in the Presence of the Entire Assembly of the Gods), Yamavaruṇakuberavāsavaśrī (Glory of Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera and Vāsava),Skt. 
reads °varuṇā°. 
Yama is the lord of death, Varuṇa is the Vedic god presiding over night, Kubera is the god of riches, and Vāsava is Indra. 
Dātrī (She who Gives), Bhoktrī (She who Takes Pleasure), Tejā (She who is Brilliance), Tejovatī (Bright One), Vibhūtī (Abundance), Samṛddhi (Great Prosperity),Omitted in Tib. 
Vivṛddhi (Growth), Unnati (Advancement), Tib. 
mthong ma “She who has Vision.” 
Dharmaśrī (Glory of the Dharma), Mādhavāśrayā (She who Relies on Viṣṇu), Kusumanilayā (She whose Abode is the Flowers),Tib. 
“She who abides in the Kumuda Flower.” 
Kumuda is a white flower that grows in or near water and blossoms at night. 
It is usually thought to be the datura plant, a member of the lily family with a very large white trumpet-like flower that opens at night, especially in the moonlight. 
Anasūyā (She who is not Spiteful),Tib. 
“She who is Patient.” 
Puruṣakārāśrayā (She who Relies on Virile Action),Omitted in Tib. 
Sarvapavitragātrā (She whose Body is Entirely Pure),Tib. 
mthu rtsal gyi gnas, “She who is the Source of Power.” 
Maṅgalahastā (She whose Hands are Auspicious),Tib. 
dag byed dang bkra shis thams cad kyi lag pa dang ldan ma, “She who has Hands that Purify and [Bring] All Auspiciousness.” 
Sarvālakṣmīnāśayitrī (She who Destroys All Inauspiciousness), Sarvapuṇyākarṣaṇaśrī (Glory that Collects All Merits), Sarvapṛthivīśrī (Glory of the Entire Earth), Sarvarājaśrī (Glory of All Kings),The Tibetan (see glossary entry for “Sarvapṛthivīśrī”) takes these two as one, “Glory of the Entire Earth and All Kings.” 
Sarvavidyādhararājaśrī (Glory of the King of All Vidyādharas), Sarvabhūtayakṣa­rākṣasa­preta­piśāca­kuṃbhāṇḍa­mahoraga­śrī (Glory of All Bhūtas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, Pretas, Piśācas, Kumbhāṇḍas and Mahoragas), Dyuti (Splendour),Omitted in the Tibetan, which here has lha’i gnas dang lha thams cad kyi dpal / bzlas brjod dang / bzlas brjod du bya ba / sbyin sreg dang / sbyin sreg tu bya ba dang / bkra shis thams cad kyi dpal, “Glory of All Abodes of the Gods and All Gods, Glory of All Incantations and What is Incanted, All Fire Offerings and What is Offered and All Auspiciousness.” 
Pramodabhāgyalolā (She who Longs for Delight and Happiness), Sarvarṣipavitraśrī (Glory that is the Purity of All Seers), Sarvaśrī (Glory of All), Bhavajyeṣṭhottamaśrī (Glory that is the First and the Foremost in Existence),The Tibetan here is bud med kyi gnas thams cad kyi gtso ma dang dpal gyi mchog, “Supreme Glory and Foremost of All that is Feminine.” 
Sarvakinnarasarvāsuryottamaśrī (Glory that is the First of All Kinnaras and of All Asuras),The Skt. 
edition has sarva­kinnara­sarva­sūryottama­śrī, “Glory that is the First of All Kinnaras and All the Sun,” 
but in the Tib. 
(see glossary entry) lha ma yin mo suggests that the spelling °sarvāsurya° here is more likely to be correct in the context. 
Niravadyasthānavāsinī (She who Stays Irreproachable), Rūpavatī (Beautiful One), Sukhakarī (She who Causes Happiness), Kuberakāntā (Beloved of Kubera), Dharmarājaśrī (Glory of the Dharma King): “Oṃ! 
Look at us, save us, and emancipate us from all sufferings. 
Make us turn in the direction of all collections of merits, svāhā.In the Tibetan text, this first section of the dhāraṇī is in Tibetan. 
The Skt. 
of the second sentence should be corrected from sarva­puṇya­sambhārānā­mukhī­kuru svāhā to sarva­puṇya­sambhārānām abhi­mukhī kuru svāhā. 
Oṃ gaṅgādi­sarva­tīrthānām abhimukhī kuru Skt. 
gaṅgādi­sarva­tīrthānyāmuikhī­kuru should be corrected to gaṅgādi­sarva­tīrthānām abhimukhī kuru. 
svāhā | oṃ sāvitryai svāhā | sarva­maṅgala­dhāriṇyai svāhā | catur­veda­nakṣatra­graha­gaṇādimūrtyai svāhā | brahmaṇe svāhā | viṣṇave svāhā | rudrāya svāhā | viśva­mukhāya svāhā | oṃ nigrigrini sarva­kāryasādhani sini sini āvāhayāmi devi śrī­vaiśravaṇāya svāhā | suvarṇa­dhana­dhānyākarṣaṇyai svāhā | sarva­puṇyā­karṣaṇyai svāhā | śrī­devatākarṣaṇyai svāhā | sarva­pāpanāśanyai svāhā | sarvā­lakṣmī­praśamanyai svāhā | sarva­tathāgatābhiṣiktāyai svāhā | sarva­devatābhimukhaśriye svāhā | āyur­bala­varṇa­karāyai svāhā | sarva­pavitra­maṅgala­hastāyai svāhā | siṃha­vāhinyai svāhā | padma­saṃbhūtāyai svāhā | sarva­kṛtya­kākhordavināśanyai svāhā. 
The Sanskrit of the dhāraṇi as transcribed in the Tibetan text appears unreliable; the dhāraṇi as presented here is transliterated from the Sanskrit edition. 
“Fearless Avalokiteśvara, anyone who is going to retain and recite these names of Śrī Mahādevī—which eliminate all offenses, overcome all sins, accumulate all merits, eliminateTib. 
med par byed pa, “make non-existent,” 
“eliminate;” 
Skt. 
praśamanakarāṇi, “make calm,” 
“pacify.” 
all inauspiciousness, and accumulate all glories, happiness and good fortunes—and who is going to retain and reciteSkt. 
omits “and recite.” 
these names of the tathāgatas, should rise in the morning, clean up, and, having offered flowers and incense to all the buddhas, also offer sandalwood incense to Śrī Mahādevī. 
Then, when he recites these names, all glory, all happiness and joys will be obtained. 
The gods will all guard, protect and preserveSkt. 
guptiṃ kariṣyanti, while Tib. 
has sbed par byed pa, “conceal.” 
him, and all of his purposes will be fulfilled.” 
When the Bhagavān had thus spoken, the fearless bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, Śrī MahādevīTib. 
has lha mo chen mo dpal de, “that Śrī Mahādevī,” 
while Skt. 
has sā, “she.” 
, the entire retinue, and the world, including gods, humans, asuras, and gandharvas, rejoiced and [678] praised the words of the Bhagavān. 
This completes The Noble Prophecy of Śrī Mahādevī.